

In the Name of God, the All-Merciful, the Most Merciful.

The Book of Knowledge

This is the First Book of the Quarter of Devotions

The Book of Knowledge, containing seven chapters:

Chapter One: On the excellence of knowledge, teaching, and learning.
Chapter Two: On the individual obligation and the communal obligation among the sciences, clarifying the definition of jurisprudence and theology within the knowledge of religion, and clarifying the knowledge of the Hereafter and the knowledge of the world.
Chapter Three: On what the common people consider to be among the sciences of religion but is not part of it, containing a clarification of the category of blameworthy knowledge and its extent.
Chapter Four: On the pitfalls of disputation and the reason people engage in controversy and argumentation.
Chapter Five: On the manners of the teacher and the student.
Chapter Six: On the pitfalls of knowledge and the scholars, and the distinguishing signs between the scholars of the world and the scholars of the Hereafter.
Chapter Seven: On the intellect, its excellence, its divisions, and the narrations that have come regarding it.



The First Chapter

On the Excellence of Knowledge, Teaching, and Learning, and Its Evidences from Revelation and Reason

The Virtue of Knowledge

Its evidences from the Qur’an are the words of the Almighty: “God bears witness that there is no deity except Him, as do the angels and those endowed with knowledge, upholding justice.” (Āl ʿImrān 3:18) Observe how He, glorified and exalted, began with Himself, then mentioned the angels, and thirdly the people of knowledge—what greater honor, merit, clarity, and nobility could there be? And God the Exalted said: “God will raise in rank those of you who believe and those who have been given knowledge.” (al-Mujādilah: 11) Ibn ʿAbbās, may God be pleased with them both, said: “The scholars have ranks above the believers by seven hundred degrees, the distance between each two degrees being a journey of five hundred years.” And the Almighty said: “Say, ‘Are those who know equal to those who do not know?’” And He said: “Only those among His servants who have knowledge fear God.” And He said: “Say, ‘Sufficient is God as a witness between me and you, and whoever has knowledge of the Scripture.’” And He said: “Said one who had knowledge from the Scripture, ‘I will bring it to you,’” indicating that he was empowered by the strength of knowledge. And the Almighty said: “But those who were given knowledge said, ‘Woe to you! The reward of God is better for those who believe and do righteous deeds,’” showing that the greatness of the Hereafter’s worth is known through knowledge. And He said: “These parables We set forth for the people, but none understands them except the knowledgeable.” And He said: “If they had referred it to the Messenger and to those in authority among them, those among them who are able to derive the ruling would have known it,” referring the judgment in events to their deduction and equating their rank with that of the prophets in uncovering God’s ruling. It is said concerning His words: “O children of Adam, We have sent down upon you a garment to cover your shameful parts,” meaning knowledge, “and adornment,” meaning certainty, “but the garment of reverence,” meaning modesty. And the Almighty said: “And We had certainly brought them a Book which We detailed by knowledge.” And He said: “We will relate to them with knowledge.” And the Almighty said: “Rather, it is clear signs in the hearts of those who have been given knowledge.” And He said: “He created man and taught him clear expression,” and this is mentioned in the context of bestowing favor.

As for the reports, the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Whomever God intends good for, He grants him understanding in religion and inspires him with right guidance.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “The scholars are the heirs of the prophets.” It is known that there is no rank above prophethood and no honor greater than the honor of inheriting that rank. And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Everything in the heavens and the earth seeks forgiveness for the scholar.” What position could surpass that of one for whom the angels of the heavens and the earth are occupied seeking forgiveness? And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Wisdom increases the noble in nobility and raises the slave until he attains the ranks of kings,” alerting by this to its fruits in this world, and it is known that the Hereafter is better and more lasting. And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Two traits are not found in a hypocrite: good conduct and understanding in religion.” Do not doubt the hadith due to the hypocrisy of some jurists of the time, for he did not mean by ‘understanding’ what you supposed; the meaning of understanding will come later, and the lowest degree of a jurist is that he knows the Hereafter is better than this world, and when this knowledge is sincere and prevails over him, he is freed from hypocrisy and ostentation. And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “The best of people is the believing scholar who, when needed, benefits others, and when not needed, suffices himself.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Faith is naked, its garment is reverence, its adornment is modesty, and its fruit is knowledge.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “The closest of people to the rank of prophethood are the people of knowledge and jihad. As for the people of knowledge, they guide people to what the messengers brought; and as for the people of jihad, they strive with their swords for what the messengers brought.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “The death of a tribe is easier than the death of a scholar.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “People are like mines, like mines of gold and silver. The best of them in pre-Islamic times are the best in Islam when they gain understanding.”

And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “On the Day of Resurrection, the ink of the scholars will be weighed against the blood of the martyrs.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Whoever preserves for my community forty hadiths from the Sunnah until he conveys them to them, I will be an intercessor and a witness for him on the Day of Resurrection.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Whoever carries from my community forty hadiths will meet God Almighty on the Day of Resurrection as a jurist and a scholar.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Whoever gains understanding in the religion of God Almighty, God will suffice him in his concerns and provide for him from where he does not expect.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “God Almighty revealed to Abraham, peace be upon him: ‘O Abraham, I am All-Knowing, and I love every knowledgeable one.’” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “The scholar is God’s trustee on earth.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Two groups of my community: if they are righteous, the people become righteous, and if they are corrupt, the people become corrupt: the rulers and the jurists.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “If a day comes upon me in which I do not increase in knowledge that brings me closer to God Almighty, then may I not be blessed in the rising sun of that day.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “In the superiority of knowledge over worship and testimony: the superiority of the scholar over the worshiper is like my superiority over the lowest of my companions.” See how he made knowledge parallel to the rank of prophethood and how he lowered the rank of action devoid of knowledge, even though the worshiper is not devoid of knowledge of the worship he performs, for without it, it would not be worship. And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “The superiority of the scholar over the worshiper is like the superiority of the full moon over the rest of the stars.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “On the Day of Resurrection, three will intercede: the prophets, then the scholars, then the martyrs.” How great is a rank that follows prophethood and surpasses martyrdom, despite what has been reported about the merit of martyrdom. And the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “God has not been worshiped by anything better than understanding in religion. A single jurist is more severe upon Satan than a thousand worshipers. Everything has a pillar, and the pillar of this religion is understanding.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “The best of your religion is its easiest, and the best worship is understanding.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “The superiority of the believing scholar over the believing worshiper is by seventy degrees.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “You have entered a time of many jurists, few reciters, few preachers, many askers, many givers; action in it is better than knowledge. But a time will come upon the people of few jurists, many preachers, few givers, many askers; knowledge in it is better than action.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Between the scholar and the worshiper are a hundred degrees, between every two degrees is the distance a swift horse covers in seventy years.” It was said: “O Messenger of God, which deeds are best?” He said: “Knowledge of God Almighty.” It was said: “Which knowledge do you mean?” He, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Knowledge of God, glorified be He.” It was said to him: “We ask about deeds, and you answer about knowledge.” He, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “A little action benefits with knowledge of God, but much action does not benefit with ignorance of God.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “God will resurrect the servants on the Day of Resurrection, then He will resurrect the scholars and say: ‘O assembly of scholars, I did not place My knowledge in you except because of My knowledge of you, and I did not place My knowledge in you to punish you. Go, for I have forgiven you.’” We ask

The Virtue of Seeking Knowledge

As for the Qur’anic verses, there is the saying of the Exalted: “Why should not a group from every section of them go forth to gain understanding in religion?” (Surah al-Tawbah: 122) and His saying, the Mighty and Majestic: “So ask the people of the Remembrance if you do not know.” (Surah al-Nahl: 43, and Surah al-Anbiya’: 7)

As for the Prophetic reports, there is his saying, peace and blessings be upon him: “Whoever treads a path in search of knowledge, Allah will thereby make a path to Paradise easy for him.” [33] And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Indeed, the angels lower their wings for the seeker of knowledge, pleased with what he does.” [34] And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “To go forth in the morning and learn one chapter of knowledge is better for you than to pray one hundred rak’ahs.” [35] And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “A chapter of knowledge that a man learns is better for him than the world and all it contains.” [36] And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Seek knowledge, even if it be in China.” [37] And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “The pursuit of knowledge is an obligation upon every Muslim.” And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Knowledge is a treasure, its keys are questions. So ask, for in it four are rewarded: the questioner, the scholar, the listener, and the one who loves them.” [38] And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “It is not fitting for the ignorant to remain silent in his ignorance, nor for the scholar to remain silent with his knowledge.” [39] And in the narration of Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased with him: “Attending the gathering of a scholar is better than praying a thousand rak’ahs, visiting a thousand sick persons, and attending a thousand funerals.” It was said: “O Messenger of Allah, and what about reciting the Qur’an?” He, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “And does the Qur’an benefit except with knowledge?” [40] And he, upon him be prayers and peace, said: “Whoever death comes upon while he is seeking knowledge to revive Islam with it, between him and the Prophets in Paradise is but one degree.” [41]

As for the narrations from the predecessors; Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them both, said: “I humbled myself as a seeker, and thus became honored as one sought.” Similarly, Ibn Abi Mulaykah, may Allah have mercy on him, said: “I have not seen the like of Ibn ‘Abbas; when you see him, you see the most handsome of people in face, and when he speaks, he is the most eloquent of people in tongue, and when he gives a legal opinion, he is the most knowledgeable of people.” And Ibn al-Mubarak, may Allah have mercy on him, said: “I wonder at one who does not seek knowledge—how does his soul call him to any nobility?” And one of the wise said: “I do not pity any men as I pity one of two men: a man who seeks knowledge but does not comprehend, and a man who comprehends knowledge but does not seek it.”

And Abu al-Darda’, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “For me to learn a single issue is more beloved to me than standing (in prayer) for a night.” He also said: “Be a scholar, or a learner, or a listener, and do not be the fourth, lest you perish.” And ‘Ata’ said: “A gathering of knowledge atones for seventy gatherings of idle play.” And ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “The death of a thousand worshippers who stand the night in prayer and fast the day is easier (to bear) than the death of one scholar well-versed in the lawful and unlawful of Allah.” And al-Shafi’i, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “The pursuit of knowledge is superior to supererogatory worship.” And Ibn ‘Abd al-Hakam, may Allah have mercy on him, said: “I was with Malik, reading knowledge to him, when the noon prayer entered, so I gathered the books to pray. He said: ‘O this one, what you have risen to do is not better than what you were engaged in, provided the intention is sound.’” And Abu al-Darda’, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “Whoever thinks that going forth in the morning to seek knowledge is not a form of striving (jihad) has a deficiency in his opinion and intellect.”

The Virtue of Teaching

As for the verses: The words of the Almighty: "And to warn their people when they return to them, so that they may beware" (Surah At-Tawbah: 122). The intended meaning is instruction and guidance. And His words, the Exalted: "And [mention] when Allah took a covenant from those who were given the Scripture to make it clear to the people and not conceal it" (Surah Al 'Imran: 187). This is an obligation for teaching. And His words, the Exalted: "And indeed, a party of them conceal the truth while they know [it]" (Surah Al-Baqarah: 146). This is a prohibition of concealment, just as He, the Exalted, said concerning testimony: "And whoever conceals it – then indeed, he is sinful in heart" (Surah Al-Baqarah: 283). And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Allah does not grant a scholar knowledge except that He takes from him a covenant like the covenant He took from the prophets: that he make it clear to the people and not conceal it." And the Almighty said: "And who is better in speech than one who invites to Allah and does righteousness" (Surah Fussilat: 33). And the Almighty said: "Invite to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good instruction" (Surah An-Nahl: 125). And the Almighty said: "And teaches them the Book and wisdom" (Surah Al-Baqarah: 129 and 151; Surah Al 'Imran: 164; Surah Al-Jumu'ah: 2).

As for the narrations: The saying of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, when he sent Mu'adh, may Allah be pleased with him, to Yemen: "That Allah guides a single man through you is better for you than the world and all that is in it." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Whoever learns a chapter of knowledge to teach the people is given the reward of seventy righteous ones." And Jesus, peace be upon him, said: "Whoever learns, acts, and teaches, he is called great in the kingdom of the heavens." And the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "On the Day of Resurrection, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, will say to the worshippers and the strivers, 'Enter Paradise.' The scholars will say, 'By the virtue of our knowledge they worshipped and strove.' Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, will say, 'You are with Me like some of My angels. Intercede, and your intercession will be granted.' So they will intercede, then they will enter Paradise." This is only for knowledge that is transmitted through teaching, not the knowledge that remains with oneself and does not transfer. And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Indeed, Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, does not take away knowledge by snatching it from the people after He has given it to them, but He takes it away by the passing of the scholars. So whenever a scholar passes away, what he had of knowledge passes away with him, until there remain only ignorant leaders. If they are asked, they give verdicts without knowledge, thus they go astray and lead others astray." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Whoever learns knowledge and then conceals it, Allah will bridle him on the Day of Resurrection with a bridle of fire." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "What an excellent gift, what an excellent present is a word of wisdom that you hear, then you fold it up [i.e., preserve it], then you carry it to a Muslim brother and teach it to him. It equals a year's worship." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "The world is accursed, accursed is what is in it, except the remembrance of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, and what aids it, or a teacher, or a learner." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Indeed, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, His angels, the inhabitants of His heavens and His earth – even the ant in its hole and the fish in the sea – send blessings upon the one who teaches people good." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "No benefit a Muslim gives to his brother is better than a good narration he conveys to him and he conveys it." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "A word of good that a believer hears, then he learns it and acts upon it, is better for him than a year's worship." And the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, went out one day and saw two gatherings. One was supplicating to Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, and beseeching Him, and the other was teaching people. He said: "As for these, they are asking Allah, the Exalted. If He wills, He gives them, and if He wills, He withholds from them. As for these, they are teaching people, and I was only sent as a teacher." Then he turned to them and sat with them. And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "The likeness of the guidance and knowledge with which Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, has sent me is like abundant rain that falls upon a land. Among it was a fertile area that absorbed the water and brought forth abundant herbage and pasture. Among it was an area that held the water, so Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, benefited people with it; they drank from it, watered, and planted. And among it was a barren area that neither held water nor produced herbage." The first he mentioned as a similitude for one who benefits from his knowledge, the second for the one who benefits others, and the third for the one deprived of both. And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "When the son of Adam dies, his deeds cease except for three: knowledge from which benefit is derived." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "The one who directs to good is like the one who does it." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "There is no envy except in two: a man whom Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, has given wisdom, so he judges by it and teaches it to the people; and a man whom Allah has given wealth, so he spends it in the way of good." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Upon my successors be the mercy of Allah." It was said, "And who are your successors?" He said, "Those who revive my tradition and teach it to the servants of Allah."

As for the reports: 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said: "Whoever narrates a narration and acts upon it, he has the like of the reward of whoever acts upon that deed." Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them both, said: "The teacher of good to people is forgiven for by everything, even the fish in the sea." And some of the scholars said: "The scholar enters between Allah and His creation, so let him see how he enters." It is narrated that Sufyan al-Thawri, may Allah have mercy on him, came to Ascalon and stayed, but no one asked him [anything]. He said, "Saddle up for me so I may leave this town. This is a town where knowledge dies." He only said that out of eagerness for the virtue of teaching and preserving knowledge thereby. 'Ata', may Allah be pleased with him, said: "I entered upon Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib while he was weeping. I said, 'What makes you weep?' He said, 'No one asks me about anything.'" And someone said: "The scholars are the lamps of the ages; each one is the lamp of his time, by which the people of his era are illuminated." Al-Hasan, may Allah have mercy on him, said: "Were it not for the scholars, people would become like cattle." That is, through teaching they bring people out from the level of animality to the level of humanity. 'Ikrimah said: "This knowledge has a price." It was said, "And what is it?" He said, "That you place it with one who carries it well and does not waste it."

Yahya ibn Mu'adh said: "The scholars are more merciful to the nation of Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, than their fathers and mothers." It was said, "How is that?" He said, "Because their fathers and mothers protect them from the fire of this world, while they protect them from the fire of the Hereafter." And it was said: "The beginning of knowledge is silence, then listening, then memorization, then action, then spreading it." And it was said: "Teach your knowledge to one who is ignorant, and learn from one who knows what you are ignorant of, for if you do that, you will know what you were ignorant of and preserve what you knew." And Mu'adh ibn Jabal said concerning teaching and learning – and I have also seen it attributed to the Prophet: "Learn knowledge, for learning it for the sake of Allah is reverence, seeking

Chapter Two
On Praiseworthy and Blameworthy Knowledge, Their Categories and Rulings, Including an Explanation of What Constitutes an Individual Obligation and What Constitutes a Communal Obligation, and Clarifying the Place of Discourse and Jurisprudence within Religious Knowledge—To What Extent They Extend—and the Superiority of Knowledge Pertaining to the Hereafter.



Explanation of the Knowledge that is an Individual Obligation

The Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Seeking knowledge is an obligation upon every Muslim." And he also said, peace and upon him: "Seek knowledge even if it be in China." People have differed concerning the knowledge which is an obligation upon every Muslim, splitting into more than twenty factions. We shall not prolong matters by detailing them, but the essence is that each group restricted the obligation to the knowledge they themselves were engaged in. Thus, the theologians said: It is the science of theology (*kalam*), for through it monotheism is comprehended and the Essence of God, exalted is He, and His attributes are known. The jurists said: It is the science of jurisprudence (*fiqh*), for through it acts of worship, the lawful and the unlawful, and what is prohibited and permitted in transactions are known, and they meant by it what individuals need, excluding rare occurrences. The exegetes and hadith scholars said: It is the knowledge of the Book and the Sunnah, for through them access to all sciences is attained.

The Sufis said: What is intended is this knowledge. Some of them said: It is the servant's knowledge of his own state and station with God, mighty and majestic is He. Some said: It is knowledge of sincerity, the defects of the souls, and distinguishing the prompting of the angel from the prompting of Satan. Some said: It is the knowledge of the inward, and that is obligatory upon specific people who are its folk, and they diverted the term from its generality.

Abu Talib al-Makki said: It is the knowledge of what is contained in the hadith which outlines the foundations of Islam, namely his saying, peace and blessings be upon him: "Islam is built upon five: the testimony that there is no god but God..." to the end of the hadith. For the obligation is these five, so knowledge of how to perform them and how they are obligatory becomes necessary.

What the accomplished seeker should be certain of, having no doubt about it, is what we shall mention: Knowledge, as we presented in the introduction of the book, is divided into the knowledge of transaction (*mu'amalah*) and the knowledge of unveiling (*mukashafah*). What is intended by this knowledge is none other than the knowledge of transaction. The transaction which the sane, adult servant is charged to perform is of three kinds: belief, action, and abstention.

Thus, when a sane man reaches maturity through nocturnal emission or age—for example, at the forenoon of a day—the first obligation upon him is to learn the two testimonies and understand their meaning, which is the statement "There is no god but God, Muhammad is the Messenger of God." It is not obligatory upon him to attain personal unveiling of this through reflection and investigation and the formulation of proofs. Rather, it suffices for him to believe in it and hold it as a certainty without the stirring of doubt or disturbance of heart. This can occur merely through imitation (*taqlid*) and hearing, without investigation or proof, for the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, was content with the rough Bedouins accepting and affirming it without learning the proof.

If he does that, he has fulfilled the obligation of the moment. The knowledge which is an individual obligation (*fard 'ayn*) upon him at that time is learning and understanding the two phrases. Nothing beyond this is required of him at that moment, as evidenced by the fact that if he were to die immediately after that, he would die obedient to God, mighty and majestic is He, not disobedient to Him. Other obligations become necessary only due to incidental occurrences, and that is not essential for every person; separation from them is conceivable. Those incidental occurrences are either related to action, abstention, or belief.

As for action: For instance, if he lives from the forenoon of his day until the time of noon prayer (*Dhuhr*), the entrance of the time for Dhuhr renews for him the obligation to learn about purification and prayer. If he is healthy and in a situation where, were he to wait until the sun passes its zenith, he would not be able to complete the learning and the action within its time—rather, the time would elapse if he busied himself with learning—then it is not far-fetched to say: The apparent ruling is that the obligation remains, so he must give precedence to learning before the time. It is also plausible to say: The obligation of the knowledge, which is a condition for the action, comes after the obligation of the action, so it is not obligatory before the zenith. And so it is with the remaining prayers. If he lives until Ramadan, the obligation to learn about fasting is renewed because of it: that its time is from dawn to sunset, that what is obligatory in it is the intention and abstaining from food, drink, and sexual intercourse, and that this continues until the sighting of the crescent moon or [the testimony of] two witnesses. If wealth accrues to him, or he had wealth upon reaching maturity, learning what is obligatory upon him regarding zakat becomes necessary, but not immediately; rather, it becomes necessary upon the completion of a year from the time of his Islam. If he owns nothing but camels, he is only obliged to learn the zakat on camels, and likewise for other categories. If the months of Hajj enter, he is not obliged to hasten to learn about Hajj, since its performance is allowed with delay (*tarakhi*), so learning it is not an immediate obligation. However, the scholars of Islam should alert him that Hajj is an obligation with delay upon everyone who possesses provision and mount, if he is the owner, such that he might deem it prudent for himself to hasten. At that point, if he resolves upon it, learning the manner of performing Hajj becomes necessary for him, and he is only obliged to learn its pillars and obligations, not its supererogatory acts. If he performs a supererogatory act, learning it is also supererogatory, not an individual obligation. There is a considered opinion, fitting for jurisprudence, regarding the prohibition of remaining silent about alerting him to the fundamental obligation of Hajj at the present moment. And so proceeds the gradual process regarding learning all other actions that are individual obligations.

As for abstentions, knowledge of them must be learned according to what renews from the situation, and that differs according to a person's condition. For it is not obligatory upon the mute to learn what is prohibited in speech, nor upon the blind to learn what is prohibited in looking, nor upon the desert dweller to learn what is prohibited regarding sitting in dwellings. That too is obligatory according to what the situation necessitates. What he knows he is free from, he is not obliged to learn. What he is engaged in, he must be alerted to it. As if, at the time of Islam, he were wearing silk, or sitting on usurped property, or looking at a non-mahram, he must be informed of that. What he is not engaged in, but is on the verge of encountering it soon, like eating and drinking, he must be taught. So if he is in a land where drinking wine and eating pork are practiced, he must be taught that and alerted to it. What must be taught, he is obliged to learn.

As for beliefs and the works of the heart, knowledge of them is obligatory according to the thoughts (*khawatir*) that occur. If a doubt occurs to him concerning the meanings indicated by the two testimonies, he is obliged to learn what leads to the removal of that doubt. If that does not occur to him and he dies before believing that the speech of God, exalted is He, is eternal, that He will be seen, that He is not a locus for originated events, and other such matters mentioned in beliefs, he dies upon Islam by consensus. However, these thoughts that necessitate beliefs: some occur naturally, and some occur from hearing from the people of the land. If he is in a land where theological discourse has spread and people speak of innovations, he should be protected from them at the onset of his maturity by being taught the truth, for if falsehood were cast to him, its removal from his heart would become obligatory, and perhaps that would be difficult. Just as if this Muslim were a merchant and usurious transactions were widespread in the land, he would be obliged to learn to beware of usury.

This is the truth concerning the knowledge which is an individual obligation. Its meaning is knowledge of how to perform the obligatory action. Whoever knows the obligatory knowledge and the time of its obligation has known the knowledge which is an individual obligation. What the Sufis mentioned regarding understanding the promptings of the enemy and the prompting of the angel is also true, but in relation to one who undertakes it. Since it is predominant that a human being is not free from incitements to evil, hypocrisy, and envy, it is necessary for him to learn from the knowledge of the "Quarter of the Destructive Matters" what he sees himself in need of. How could it not be obligatory upon him when the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Three things are destructive: obeyed greed, followed desire, and a man's admiration for himself."

No human is free from them. The rest of what we shall mention of blameworthy states of the heart, like arrogance, conceit, and their sisters, follow these three destructive matters. Removing them is an individual obligation, and it is not possible to remove them except by knowing their limits, knowing their causes

Explanation of the Knowledge that is a Communal Obligation

Know that the distinction of what is obligatory can only be made clear by mentioning the divisions of the sciences. The sciences, in relation to the purpose we are pursuing, are divided into religious and non-religious. By 'religious' I mean that which is derived from the Prophets, peace and blessings of God be upon them, and to which reason does not guide, such as arithmetic; nor experience, such as medicine; nor hearing, such as language. The sciences that are not religious are divided into the praiseworthy, the blameworthy, and the permissible.

The praiseworthy are those connected to the welfare of worldly affairs, like medicine and arithmetic. This is further divided into what is a collective obligation (*fard kifayah*) and what is a virtue but not an obligation. As for the collective obligation, it is knowledge indispensable for the proper order of worldly affairs, like medicine, for it is necessary for the need of preserving bodies; and like arithmetic, for it is necessary in transactions, the division of bequests and inheritances, and other such matters. These are the sciences which, if a land were devoid of someone to undertake them, would cause hardship to its people; and if one person undertakes them, it suffices and the obligation is lifted from the others. So do not be astonished by our statement that medicine and arithmetic are among the collective obligations, for indeed the fundamentals of crafts are also among the collective obligations, like agriculture, weaving, and governance—indeed, even cupping and tailoring. For if a land were devoid of a cupper, destruction would hasten to them, and they would be in hardship by exposing themselves to destruction. For He who sent down the disease sent down the cure and guided to its use, and prepared the means for its application. It is not permissible to expose oneself to destruction by neglecting it.

As for what is considered a virtue and not an obligation, it is delving into the subtleties of arithmetic, the realities of medicine, and other such matters which one can do without, but which grant increased proficiency in the needed capacity.

As for the blameworthy, it is the knowledge of magic, talismans, sleight of hand, and deception. As for the permissible, it is knowledge of poetry that contains no vulgarity, histories of reports, and what is similar.

As for the religious sciences, which are the intended subject of clarification, they are all praiseworthy. However, what is thought to be religious but is actually blameworthy may become confused with them. Thus they are divided into the praiseworthy and the blameworthy.

As for the praiseworthy, they have foundations, branches, prerequisites, and complements. They are of four kinds:

The first kind: The foundations. These are four: the Book of God Almighty, the Sunnah of the Messenger of God (peace be upon him), the consensus of the community, and the narrations of the Companions. Consensus is a foundation in that it indicates the Sunnah; thus it is a foundation of the third degree. Likewise, the narration, for it also indicates the Sunnah, because the Companions (may God be pleased with them) witnessed the revelation and its descent, and they perceived through contextual indicators what was hidden from others in its plain form. Expressions may not encompass what was perceived through indicators. From this perspective, the scholars saw the necessity of following them and adhering to their narrations, under a specific condition and in a specific manner according to those who hold this view, the details of which are not appropriate for this discipline.

The second kind: The branches. This is what is understood from these foundations, not by the dictate of their wordings, but by meanings to which minds are alerted, whereby understanding expands so that something other than the uttered wording is understood from it. As was understood from his statement (peace be upon him), "A judge should not pass judgment while angry," that he should not judge if he is fearful, hungry, or suffering from illness. This is of two types:

One pertains to the welfare of this world and is contained in the books of jurisprudence; those responsible for it are the jurists, who are the scholars of this world.

The second pertains to the welfare of the Hereafter, which is the science of the states of the heart, its praiseworthy and blameworthy traits, what is pleasing to God Almighty and what is disliked. This is what the latter part of this book contains—I mean the entirety of *The Revival of the Religious Sciences*—and from it is the knowledge of what emanates from the heart onto the limbs in their acts of worship and customary practices, which is what the first part of this book contains.

The third kind: The prerequisites. These are those which function as instruments, like the science of language and grammar, for they are instruments for the science of the Book of God Almighty and the Sunnah of His Prophet (peace be upon him). Language and grammar are not religious sciences in themselves, but delving into them is necessitated by the religious law, since this law came in the language of the Arabs, and every law only becomes manifest through a language. Thus, learning that language becomes an instrument. Among the instruments is the science of penmanship, except that this is not essential, since the Messenger of God (peace be upon him) was unlettered. If one could conceive of independently memorizing all that one hears, one would dispense with writing, but due to the prevalence of incapacity, it has become essential.

The fourth kind: The complements. This is in the science of the Qur'an, for it is divided into what pertains to the wording, like learning the recitations and points of articulation; into what pertains to the meaning, like exegesis—for its reliance is also on transmission, since language alone cannot independently manage it; and into what pertains to its rulings, like knowing the abrogating and abrogated, the general and the specific, the explicit and the apparent, and how to use some in conjunction with others. This is the science known as the principles of jurisprudence, and it also encompasses the Sunnah.

As for the complements in narrations and reports, it is the knowledge of the men, their names, their lineages, the names of the Companions and their attributes; the knowledge of probity in narrators; the knowledge of their conditions to distinguish the weak from the strong; the knowledge of their lifespans to distinguish the disconnected from the connected chain, and so forth. These are the religious sciences, and all of them are praiseworthy; indeed, all of them are among the collective obligations.

If you say: Why have you included jurisprudence among the sciences of this world?
Then know that God Almighty brought Adam (peace be upon him) out from dust, and brought his progeny from an extract of clay, from a gushing fluid. He brought them from loins to wombs, from there to this world, then to the grave, then to the presentation, then to Paradise or to the Fire. This is their origin, this is their ultimate end, and these are their stations. He created this world as provision for the Return, so that one may take from it what is suitable for provision. If they took it with justice, disputes would cease and the jurists would be rendered idle. But they took it with desires, so disputes arose from it. Thus, the need arose for a ruler to govern them, and the ruler needed a law by which to govern them. The jurist is the one knowledgeable in the law of governance and the method of mediation between people when they dispute due to the rule of desires. Thus, the jurist is the teacher of the ruler and his guide to the ways of governing people and controlling them, so that their affairs in this world may be set in order through their uprightness. By my life, it is also connected to religion, but not in itself; rather, through the intermediary of this world, for this world is the cultivation field for the Hereafter, and religion is not perfected except through this world.

Sovereignty and religion are twins. Religion is the foundation, and the ruler is the guardian. That which has no foundation is demolished, and that which has no guardian is lost. Sovereignty and control are not perfected except through the ruler, and the method of control in adjudicating cases is through jurisprudence. Just as governing people through sovereignty is not from the science of religion in the first degree, but is an aid to that without which religion is not perfected, so too is knowing the method of governance. It is known that the Hajj is not perfected except with an escort that guards against the Arabs on the path. But the Hajj is one thing, traversing the path to Hajj is a second thing, undertaking the guarding without which Hajj is not perfected is a third thing, and knowing the ways, stratagems, and laws of guarding is a fourth thing.

The essence of the discipline of jurisprudence is knowing the methods of governance and guarding. This is indicated by what is narrated with a chain: "None should issue legal verdicts except three: a commander, one commanded, or one who presumes." The commander is the Imam, and they were the ones who issued verdicts. The commanded is his deputy. The presumptuous is other than these two—he who assumes that responsibility without need. The Companions (may God be pleased with them) used to be cautious about issuing verdicts, to the point that each would refer the questioner to his companion. They were not cautious, however, if asked about the knowledge of the Qur'an and the path of the Hereafter. In some narrations, instead of 'presumptuous' is 'hypocrite,' for whoever assumes the peril

Secondly, no one traversing the path to the Hereafter can ever do without it, neither the healthy nor the sick. As for medicine, it is only needed by the sick, who are the minority.

Thirdly, the science of jurisprudence is adjacent to the science of the path to the Hereafter, for it concerns the actions of the limbs, and the source and origin of the actions of the limbs are the attributes of the hearts. Praiseworthy actions stem from praiseworthy character traits that bring salvation in the Hereafter, and blameworthy actions stem from blameworthy traits. The connection between the limbs and the heart is not hidden. As for health and sickness, their origin lies in the purity of the temperament and humors, which are attributes of the body, not of the heart. Therefore, whenever jurisprudence is compared to medicine, its nobility becomes apparent, and when the science of the path to the Hereafter is compared to jurisprudence, the nobility of the science of the path to the Hereafter also becomes apparent.

If you say: "Elucidate for me the science of the path to the Hereafter in detail, indicating its chapters, even if its particulars cannot be exhaustively covered," then know that it is divided into two parts: the science of unveiling and the science of spiritual conduct.

The first part is the science of unveiling, which is the science of the inward. It is the ultimate of sciences. Some of the knowers of God have said: "Whoever has no share in this science, I fear for him a bad end. The smallest share of it is to believe in it and submit to its people." Another said: "Whoever possesses two traits will not be opened to anything of this science: innovation or arrogance." It is said: "Whoever loves this world or persists in following his own desire will not attain it," though he may attain other sciences. The least punishment for one who denies it is that he will taste nothing of it. It is said in verse:

"A land for one absent from you is his absence,
That is a sin whose punishment is within it."

This is the science of the truthful and those brought near—I mean the science of unveiling. It is an expression for a light that appears in the heart when it is purified and cleansed of its blameworthy attributes. From that light, many matters are unveiled which one had previously only heard the names of, imagining for them general, unclear meanings. Then they become clear at that time, until true knowledge is attained of the Essence of God, glorified and exalted be He, and His perfect, everlasting attributes, His actions, His wisdom in the creation of this world and the Hereafter, and the manner of His ordaining the Hereafter after this world. And knowledge of the meaning of prophethood and the Prophet, the meaning of revelation, the meaning of Satan, the meaning of the terms 'angels' and 'devils,' how the devils are enemies to man, how the angel appears to the prophets, how revelation reaches them, knowledge of the dominion of the heavens and the earth, knowledge of the heart and how the troops of angels and devils clash within it, knowledge of the distinction between the prompting of the angel and the prompting of Satan, knowledge of the Hereafter, Paradise, Hell, the punishment of the grave, the Bridge, the Scale, and the Reckoning.

And the meaning of His saying, exalted is He: "Read your record. Sufficient is yourself this day as accountant against you" (Qur'an 17:14). And the meaning of His saying, exalted is He: "But the Home of the Hereafter is best for those who fear God, so will you not reason?" (Qur'an 29:64). And the meaning of meeting God, mighty and majestic, and gazing upon His Noble Countenance, the meaning of nearness to Him and dwelling in His proximity, the meaning of attaining felicity by accompanying the Highest Assembly and keeping company with the angels and the prophets, the meaning of the varying degrees of the people of Paradise until some see others as one sees the glittering star in the depth of the sky, and other such matters whose details are lengthy.

For people, after believing in the fundamentals of these matters, have various stations regarding their meanings. Some hold that all of it is metaphorical and that what God has prepared for His righteous servants is "what no eye has seen, no ear has heard, and what has never occurred to the heart of any human being," and that for creation regarding Paradise there are only attributes and names. Some hold that some of it is metaphorical and some corresponds to the realities understood from their terms. Likewise, some hold that the ultimate knowledge of God, mighty and majestic, is to acknowledge incapacity to know Him. Some claim great things in knowledge of God, mighty and majestic. Some say the limit of knowledge of God, mighty and majestic, is what the belief of all the common people has reached: that He is Existent, Knowing, Powerful, Hearing, Seeing, Speaking.

By the science of unveiling, we mean that the veil is lifted until the clarity of truth in these matters becomes clear to him with a clarity that functions like direct vision, in which there is no doubt. This is possible in the essence of man, were it not that the mirror of the heart has accumulated rust and foulness with the filth of this world. By the science of the path to the Hereafter, we mean the knowledge of how to polish this mirror from these impurities which are the veil from God, glorified and exalted, and from knowledge of His attributes and actions.

Its purification and cleansing are achieved by restraining from desires and following the prophets, prayers and peace of God be upon them, in all their states. To the extent that the heart is cleared and aligns itself toward the Truth, His realities gleam within it. There is no way to it except through spiritual discipline, whose details will come in their place, and through knowledge and teaching. These are the sciences that are not written in books, and one upon whom God has bestowed something of them does not speak of them except with its people—those who share in it—by way of mutual reminder and as secrets.

This is the hidden knowledge intended by the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, in his saying: "Verily, there is a knowledge like a hidden treasure. None know it except the knowers of God, exalted is He. When they speak it, none are ignorant of it except those deceived by God, exalted is He. So do not belittle a scholar to whom God has given knowledge from Him, for God, mighty and majestic, did not belittle him when He gave it to him."

As for the second part, which is the science of spiritual conduct, it is the science of the states of the heart. The praiseworthy among them are such as patience, gratitude, fear, hope, contentment, asceticism, God-consciousness, satisfaction, generosity, recognition of God's favor, exalted is He, in all states, beneficence, good opinion, good character, good companionship, truthfulness, and sincerity. Knowing the realities of these states, their limits, their causes by which they are acquired, their fruits, their signs, and treating what has weakened among them until it strengthens and what has departed until it returns—this is from the science of the Hereafter.

As for the blameworthy, they are fear of poverty, displeasure with the divine decree, rancor, malice, envy, deceit, seeking high status, love of praise, love of long life in this world for enjoyment, arrogance, ostentation, anger, haughtiness, enmity, hatred, greed, stinginess, craving, extravagance, insolence, pride, exalting the rich, belittling the poor, boasting, arrogance, rivalry, vainglory, being too proud for the truth, delving into what is of no concern, love of excessive speech, conceit, adorning oneself for people, flattery, self-admiration, being occupied with the faults of others instead of one's own faults, the departure of grief from the heart, the exit of awe from it, vigorously defending oneself when humiliated, weak defense of the truth, taking public friends while harboring secret enmity, feeling secure from God's plan, glorified and exalted, in stripping away what He has given, relying on one's obedience, cunning, treachery, deception, long hopes, harshness, coarseness, rejoicing in this world, sorrow over its loss, familiarity with created beings, feeling desolate at parting from them, rudeness, frivolity, haste, lack of modesty, lack of mercy.

These and their like are attributes of the heart, the planting grounds of abominations and the sources of forbidden actions. Their opposites—the praiseworthy character traits—are the wellspring of acts of obedience and nearness. Knowledge of the limits, realities, causes, fruits, and treatment of these matters is the science of the Hereafter, and it is an individual obligation according to the legal verdict of the scholars of the Hereafter.

Whoever turns away from it is destroyed by the might of the King of Kings in the Hereafter, just as whoever turns away from outward actions is destroyed by the sword of the rulers of this world according to the legal verdict of the jurists of this world. The jurists look into individual obligations relative to the rectification of this world, and this is relative to the rectification of the Hereafter. If a jurist were asked about the meaning of one of these meanings—even about sincerity, for example, or reliance, or how to guard against ost



Chapter Three

Concerning what the common people deem among the praiseworthy sciences, yet it is not of them.

Herein lies an explanation of the manner in which some knowledge may be blameworthy, and an explanation of the alteration of the names of knowledge—namely, jurisprudence, knowledge, monotheism, remembrance, and wisdom—and an explanation of the praiseworthy measure of the religious sciences and the blameworthy measure thereof.

Explanation of the Reason for Blaming Blameworthy Knowledge

Perhaps you will say: Knowledge is the recognition of a thing as it truly is, and it is among the attributes of God, the Exalted. How then can a thing be knowledge and yet, while being knowledge, be blameworthy?

Know then that knowledge is not blamed for its essence, but rather it is blamed in relation to servants due to one of three causes:

The first is that it leads to some harm, either for its possessor or for others. Just as the knowledge of magic and talismans is blamed—and it is a reality, for the Qur’an testifies to it and that it is a means by which separation between spouses is achieved; indeed, the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, was bewitched and fell ill because of it until Gabriel, upon him be peace, informed him of it and extracted the magic from beneath a stone at the bottom of a well—it is a type [of knowledge] acquired from knowing the properties of substances and from astronomical matters concerning the risings of stars. From those substances, an effigy is made in the likeness of the bewitched person, and a specific time from the risings is observed for it, and words are coupled with it, uttered from disbelief and obscenity contrary to the Sacred Law. Through this, assistance from devils is sought, and from the totality of this, by the decree of God, the Exalted, establishing custom, strange states occur in the bewitched person. Knowing these causes, insofar as it is a knowing, is not blameworthy, but it is only suitable for harming creation and as a means to evil. Evil is evil, and that was the reason for it being blameworthy knowledge. Indeed, if a tyrant asks about the location of a person who has followed a friend from among the friends of God in order to kill him, and he has hidden in a secure place, it is not permissible to alert him to it; rather, lying about it is obligatory. Mentioning its location is guidance and imparting knowledge of the thing as it is, but it is blameworthy because it leads to harm.

The second is that it is harmful to its possessor in most cases, like the knowledge of the stars. For it, in itself, is not blameworthy for its essence, as it is of two divisions: A division of calculation, and the Qur’an has spoken that the course of the sun and moon is calculated, as He, the Almighty, said: "The sun and the moon [move] by precise calculation" (Ar-Rahman 55:5). And He, the Almighty, said: "And the moon - We have determined for it phases, until it returns [appearing] like the old date stalk" (Yasin 36:39). And the second: judgments. Its essence reverts to inferring events from causes, and it resembles the inference of a physician from the pulse regarding what will occur of illness. It is a knowledge of the courses of God’s, the Exalted, customary way and habit in His creation. But the Sacred Law has blamed it. He, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "When Divine Decree is mentioned, withhold; and when the stars are mentioned, withhold; and when my Companions are mentioned, withhold." And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "I fear for my community after me three things: the injustice of rulers, belief in the stars, and denial of Divine Decree." And 'Umar ibn al-Khattab, may God be pleased with him, said: Learn from the stars that by which you are guided on land and sea, then withhold. It was only prohibited for three aspects:

One: It is harmful to most of creation. For if it is conveyed to them that these effects occur following the movement of the planets, it settles in their souls that the planets are the effecters and that they are the deities managing affairs, for they are noble, celestial substances, and their impression becomes great in the hearts. Thus, the heart remains turned towards them, and good and evil are seen as to be feared or hoped for from their direction, and the remembrance of God, glory be to Him, is erased from the heart. For the weak one restricts his view to the intermediaries, and the firmly rooted scholar is he who perceives that the sun, moon, and stars are subjugated by His command, glory and exaltation be to Him. The example of the weak one's view of the occurrence of sunlight following the sunrise is like an ant, if intellect were created for it and it were upon the surface of a paper looking at the blackness of a line being renewed; it would believe it is the action of the pen and does not ascend in its view to witnessing the fingers, then from them to the hand, then from it to the will moving the hand, then from it to the writer who is capable and willing, then from him to the Creator of the hand, capability, and will. So the view of most creation is restricted to the lowly, proximate causes, severed from ascending to the Causer of causes. This is one of the reasons for the prohibition regarding the stars.

The second: The judgments of the stars are pure conjecture, not attained with certainty or even assumption regarding individuals. Judging by it is a judgment in ignorance. Thus, its blame is from this perspective—that it is ignorance, not that it is knowledge. Indeed, that was a miracle for Idris, upon him be peace, as is narrated, and that knowledge has become obliterated and vanished. What occurs of a astrologer's accuracy on rare occasion is coincidence, for he may perceive some causes, but the effect does not occur following them except after many conditions whose realities are not within human capacity to perceive. If it happens that God, the Exalted, decrees the remaining causes, accuracy occurs; and if He does not decree it, he errs. This is like a person's conjecture that the sky will rain today whenever he sees clouds gathering and emanating from mountains, so his assumption is stirred by that. Perhaps the day becomes hot with the sun and the clouds disperse, or perhaps the opposite occurs. Mere clouds are not sufficient for the coming of rain, and the remaining causes are not known. Likewise, the conjecture of a sailor that the ship will be safe, relying on what he is accustomed to from habit regarding winds—and those winds have hidden causes he does not perceive—so sometimes he is accurate in his conjecture and sometimes he errs. For this reason, speaking about the stars is also prohibited.

The third: There is no benefit in it. The least of its states is that it is delving into superfluities that avail nothing, and wasting the lifetime, which is a person's most precious commodity, in what is of no benefit. That is the utmost loss. Indeed, the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, passed by a man with people gathered around him and said, "What is this?" They said, "A learned man." He said, "In what?" They said, "In poetry and the lineages of the Arabs." He said, "Knowledge that does not benefit, and ignorance that does not harm." And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said, "Knowledge is only a decisive verse, an established tradition, or a just obligation." Therefore, delving into the stars and the like is venturing into peril and delving into ignorance without benefit. For what is decreed will be, and guarding against it is not possible, unlike medicine, for the need for it is pressing and most of its evidence is from what is perceived. And unlike dream interpretation, even though it is conjecture, for it is a part of forty-six parts of prophethood, and there is no peril in it.

The third cause: Delving into knowledge from which the delver gains no beneficial knowledge. Thus, it is blameworthy in his regard, like learning subtle sciences before the grand ones, and the obscure before the clear, and like investigating the divine secrets which philosophers and theologians have perceived but have not comprehended independently, nor have they independently comprehended them and understood the ways to some of them except the prophets and the friends [of God]. Therefore, people must be restrained from investigating them and returned to what the Sacred Law has articulated. In that is sufficiency for the one granted success. How many a person has delved into sciences and was harmed by them, and had he not delved into them, his state in religion would have been better than what he came to. One should not deny that knowledge can be harmful to some people, just as the meat of birds and types of delicate sweets harm the suckling infant. Indeed, perhaps a person is benefited by ignorance of some matters. It has been narrated that a man complained to a physician about the infertility of his wife, that she did not bear children. The physician felt her pulse and said, "You have no need for a fertility medicine, for you will die within forty days," and the pulse indicated it. The woman felt immense fear, her life became bitter, she brought out her wealth and distributed it, made her will, and remained neither eating nor drinking until the period ended and she did not die. Her husband came to the physician and said to him, "She did not die." The physician said, "I

Explanation of the Terms of the Sciences That Have Been Substituted

Know that the confusion of blameworthy sciences with the sacred sciences arises from the distortion of praiseworthy terms, their alteration, and their transference—through corrupt motives—to meanings other than what the righteous predecessors and the first generation intended. These are five terms: jurisprudence (fiqh), knowledge (‘ilm), divine unity (tawḥīd), remembrance and admonition (dhikr and tadhkīr), and wisdom (ḥikmah). These are praiseworthy names, and those characterized by them are the bearers of religious offices. Yet they have now been transferred to blameworthy meanings, so that hearts recoil from the blame of those described by their meanings, due to the widespread application of these names to them.

The first term: Jurisprudence (Fiqh). They have manipulated it by specification, not by transference and transformation, when they restricted it to knowledge of obscure branches in legal verdicts (fatāwā), mastery of the subtleties of their rationales, excessive discourse about them, and memorizing statements related to them. Thus, whoever delves deeper into them and occupies himself more with them is called the most learned in jurisprudence. Yet the name ‘fiqh’ in the first era was applied generally to knowledge of the path to the Hereafter, understanding the subtleties of the soul’s defects and the corrupters of deeds, powerful comprehension of the insignificance of this world, intense yearning for the bliss of the Hereafter, and the domination of fear over the heart. This is indicated by His words, exalted is He: “...so that they may gain understanding in religion and warn their people when they return to them” (Qur’an 9:122). What achieves warning and instilling fear is this jurisprudence, not the subdivisions of divorce, manumission, imprecation, deferred sale, or lease. The latter do not produce warning or fear; rather, exclusive devotion to them constantly hardens the heart and strips it of reverence, as we witness today from those devoted solely to them. And He, exalted, said: “They have hearts with which they do not understand” (Qur’an 7:179). He meant by it the meanings of faith, not legal verdicts. By my life, ‘fiqh’ and ‘understanding’ in the language are two names with one meaning; the discussion is only about the customary usage, ancient and modern. He, exalted, said: “...Indeed, you are more fearful in their hearts than Allah” (Qur’an 59:13). He attributed their lack of fear of Allah and their magnifying the might of creation to a lack of understanding (fiqh). Consider, then, whether that results from not memorizing the subdivisions of legal verdicts, or from lacking the sciences we mentioned. And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Learned, understanding scholars” regarding those who came to him. Sa‘d ibn Ibrāhīm al-Zuhrī, may Allah have mercy on him, was asked: Who are the most understanding of the people of Madinah? He said: The most God-fearing of them. It is as if he pointed to the fruit of understanding—and God-consciousness is the fruit of inward knowledge, not legal verdicts and judgments. And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “Shall I not inform you of the truly understanding? They said: Yes. He said: He who does not make people despair of Allah’s mercy, nor make them feel secure from Allah’s plan, nor cause them to lose hope in Allah’s spirit, and who does not abandon the Qur’an out of desire for something else.” And when Anas ibn Mālik narrated the saying of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him: “For me to sit with a people who remember Allah from morning until sunrise is dearer to me than freeing four slaves,” he turned to Zayd al-Raqāshī and Ziyād al-Numayrī and said: “Gatherings of remembrance were not like your gatherings, where one of you delivers his sermon to his companions and narrates traditions in succession. Rather, we used to sit and remember faith, ponder the Qur’an, gain understanding in religion, and count Allah’s blessings upon us as understanding.” Thus, he called pondering the Qur’an and counting blessings ‘understanding.’ The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: “A servant does not fully understand until he despises people for the sake of Allah, and until he sees the Qur’an in many aspects.” It is also narrated, attributed to Abū al-Dardā’, may Allah be pleased with him, along with his saying: “Then he turns to his own soul and despises it even more.” And Farqad al-Sabakhī asked al-Ḥasan about something, and he answered him. He said: “The jurists disagree with you.” Al-Ḥasan, may Allah have mercy on him, said: “May your mother be bereft of you, O Farqad! Have you ever seen a jurist with your own eyes? The jurist is only the one who is ascetic regarding this world, desirous of the Hereafter, insightful about his religion, constant in worship of his Lord, scrupulous, restraining himself from the honor of Muslims, chaste regarding their wealth, sincere to their community.” He did not say in all of that: “The memorizer of the branches of legal verdicts.” I do not say that the name ‘fiqh’ did not encompass legal verdicts in outward rulings, but it was by way of generality and inclusion, or by way of entailment. Their application of it to knowledge of the Hereafter was more frequent. Thus, from this specification, deception became apparent, inciting people to devote themselves exclusively to it and turn away from knowledge of the Hereafter and the rulings of the hearts. They found in that an aid from natural disposition, for inward knowledge is obscure, acting upon it is difficult, and attaining through it positions of authority, judgeship, status, and wealth is impossible. So Satan found an avenue to make that appealing to hearts through the specification of the name ‘fiqh,’ which is a praiseworthy name in the Sacred Law.

The second term: Knowledge (‘Ilm). It used to be applied to knowledge of Allah, exalted is He, His signs, His actions among His servants, and His creation, to the extent that when ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, died, Ibn Mas‘ūd, may Allah have mercy on him, said: “Nine-tenths of knowledge has died.” He defined it with the definite article, then explained knowledge as knowledge of Allah, glorious and exalted is He. They also manipulated it by specification until they mostly made it famous for one who engages in disputation with opponents in juristic issues and others. Such a one is said to be the true scholar and the master of knowledge, while one who does not practice that or occupy himself with it is considered among the weak and is not counted among the people of knowledge. This too is manipulation by specification. Yet most of what has come regarding the merits of knowledge and scholars pertains to the scholars of Allah, exalted is He, His rulings, His actions, and His attributes. Now it is applied to one who comprehends nothing of the sacred sciences except dialectical forms in disputed issues, and is thereby considered among the masters of scholars, despite his ignorance of exegesis, traditions, the principles of the school, and others. This has become a destructive cause for many seekers of knowledge.

The third term: Divine Unity (Tawḥīd). It has now been made an expression for the discipline of theology (kalām), knowledge of the method of argumentation, mastery of the ways of refuting opponents, and the ability to be verbose in it by multiplying questions, raising doubts, and composing objections. Groups among them even titled themselves ‘the people of justice and divine unity,’ and the theologians called the scholars of divine unity by that name, whereas all that is specific to this discipline was unknown in the first era. Rather, they strongly denounced anyone who opened a door to disputation and contention. As for what the Qur’an contains of clear proofs that minds readily accept upon first hearing, that was known to all, and knowledge of the Qur’an was all knowledge. Divine unity for them was an expression for another matter that most theologians do not understand, and if they understand it, they are not characterized by it: It is to see all things from Allah, exalted is He, with a vision that cuts off one’s attention from causes and intermediaries, so that one sees all good and evil only from Him, majestic is His glory. This is a noble station, one of its fruits is reliance (tawakkul), as will be explained in the Book of Reliance. Among its fruits also is abandoning complaint against creation, abandoning anger toward them, and acceptance and submission to the decree of Allah, exalted is He. One of its fruits was the saying of Abū Bakr al-Ṣiddīq, may Allah be pleased with him, when it was said to him during his illness: “Shall we call a physician for you?” He said: “The Physician has made me ill.” And another saying when he was ill and it was said to him: “What did the physician say about your illness?” He said: “He said to me: ‘Indeed, I do what I will.’” Evidence for this will come in the Book of Reliance and the Book of Divine Unity.

Explanation of the Praiseworthy Measure of Praiseworthy Sciences

Know that knowledge, in this consideration, is of three categories: a category that is blameworthy, whether little or much; a category that is praiseworthy, whether little or much—and the more it is, the better and more excellent; and a category wherein a sufficient amount is praiseworthy, but what exceeds that is not praiseworthy, nor is exhaustive pursuit in it. This is like the conditions of the body. For among them is that which is praiseworthy, whether little or much, such as health and beauty; and among them is that which is blameworthy, whether little or much, such as ugliness and bad character; and among them is that wherein moderation is praiseworthy, such as spending wealth, for extravagance in it is not praiseworthy, though it is a form of spending; and like courage, for recklessness in it is not praiseworthy, though it is of the genus of courage. So it is with knowledge.

The blameworthy category of it, whether little or much, is that which has no benefit in religion or worldly life, for in it is harm that outweighs its benefit, like the knowledge of magic, talismans, and astrology. Some of it has no benefit at all, and devoting one's lifetime—which is the most precious thing a human possesses—to it is waste, and wasting what is precious is blameworthy. And some of it contains harm that exceeds what one imagines is achieved by fulfilling a worldly desire, for that is not considered in comparison to the harm resulting from it.

As for the category praiseworthy to the utmost limits of exhaustive pursuit, it is knowledge of God Almighty, His attributes, His actions, His way with His creation, and His wisdom in arranging the Hereafter upon this world. For this is knowledge sought for its own sake and to attain thereby the happiness of the Hereafter. Exerting one's utmost ability in it falls short of the limit of what is obligatory, for it is an ocean whose depths cannot be fathomed; the seekers merely hover around its shores and edges according to what is made easy for them. None have plunged into its depths except the prophets, the saints, and those firmly grounded in knowledge, according to the difference in their strength and the varying decree of God Almighty concerning them. This is the concealed knowledge that is not written in books. What aids in becoming alert to it is learning and observing the states of the scholars of the Hereafter, as their description will come later—this at the beginning. And what aids in it in the Hereafter is striving, spiritual discipline, purifying the heart, and emptying it from attachments to the world, and emulating therein the prophets and saints, so that it may become clear to every seeker according to his provision, not according to his effort. But there is no dispensing with striving in it, for striving is the key to guidance; there is no other key for it.

As for the sciences wherein only a specific amount is praiseworthy, they are the sciences we mentioned under the collective obligations. For in every science of them there is a minimum, which is the least; moderation, which is the middle; and exhaustive pursuit beyond that moderation, which has no limit until the end of life. So be one of two men: either occupied with yourself, or free for others after finishing with yourself. Beware of occupying yourself with what reforms others before reforming yourself. If you are the one occupied with yourself, occupy yourself only with the knowledge that is obligatory upon you according to what your state requires and what pertains to outward acts, such as learning prayer, purification, and fasting. But the most important, which everyone neglects, is knowledge of the attributes of the heart, what is praiseworthy among them and what is blameworthy, for no human is free from blameworthy attributes like greed, envy, ostentation, arrogance, self-admiration, and their sisters—all of which are destructive. Neglecting them is among the obligations, while occupying oneself with outward acts resembles occupying oneself with plastering the exterior of the body when afflicted with scabies and boils, while neglecting to expel the matter through bloodletting and purgation. The superficial scholars point to outward acts, just as the methodical physicians point to plastering the exterior of the body. The scholars of the Hereafter point only to purifying the interior and cutting off the sources of evil by corrupting their origins and uprooting their plantings from the heart. Most people have resorted to outward acts instead of purifying hearts because the acts of the limbs are easy and the acts of the hearts are difficult, just as one who finds bitter medicines difficult resorts to external plastering. He continues to toil in plastering while the matter increases and diseases multiply for him. If you desire the Hereafter, seek salvation, and flee from eternal destruction, occupy yourself with knowledge of the inward maladies and their treatment, as we detailed in the Quarter of Destructive Things. That will inevitably lead you to the praiseworthy stations mentioned in the Quarter of Saving Things, for when the heart is emptied of the blameworthy, it becomes filled with the praiseworthy. The land, when cleared of weeds, grows varieties of crops and fragrant plants; if not cleared of that, it does not grow them. So do not occupy yourself with collective obligations, especially when among the people are those who have undertaken them. For one who destroys himself in what reforms others is foolish. How severe is the folly of one into whose clothing vipers and scorpions have entered, intending to kill him, while he seeks a flyswatter to drive flies away from others—which neither enriches him nor saves him from what he faces from those snakes and scorpions when they intend him.

If you become free from yourself and its purification, and are able to abandon outward and inward sin, and that becomes your constant practice and an easy habit for you—though how far that is from you—then occupy yourself with the collective obligations and observe gradation in them. Begin with the Book of God Almighty, then with the Sunnah of the Messenger of God (peace be upon him), then with the science of exegesis and the other sciences of the Qur’an, such as knowledge of the abrogating and abrogated, the separated and connected, the clear and the ambiguous, and likewise in the Sunnah. Then occupy yourself with the branches, which is the science of the school of jurisprudence, excluding differences of opinion, then with the principles of jurisprudence, and so on to the rest of the sciences according to what the lifetime allows and the time assists. Do not consume your lifetime in one single discipline seeking exhaustive pursuit, for knowledge is vast and life is short. These sciences are instruments and preliminaries; they are not sought for themselves but for other ends. Everything sought for other than itself should not cause one to forget the objective and acquire too much of it. Limit yourself in common language knowledge to what enables you to understand the speech of the Arabs and speak it, and in its rare aspects to the rare words of the Qur’an and Hadith, and avoid delving deeply into it. Limit yourself in grammar to what pertains to the Book and the Sunnah. There is no science but that it has a minimum, a moderation, and an exhaustive pursuit. We shall point to them in Hadith, exegesis, jurisprudence, and theology so you may analogize others to them.

The minimum in exegesis is what amounts to twice the Qur’an in volume, as al-Wahidi al-Naysaburi composed in his *al-Wajiz*; moderation is what amounts to three times the Qur’an, as he composed in his *al-Wasit*; and beyond that is exhaustive pursuit, which is unnecessary and has no limit until the end of life. As for Hadith, the minimum is acquiring what is in the two *Sahihs* by verifying a copy with a man knowledgeable in the text of Hadith. As for memorizing the names of narrators, you are relieved of that by what is transmitted to you from your predecessors, and you may rely on their books. It is not incumbent upon you to memorize the texts of the two *Sahihs*, but acquire them in a manner that enables you to seek what you need when needed. Moderation in it is to add to them what is outside them from what is reported in sound compilations. Exhaustive pursuit is beyond that to encompassing all that is transmitted, weak and strong, sound and unsound, with knowledge of the numerous chains of transmission and knowledge of the conditions, names, and descriptions of the narrators.

As for jurisprudence, the minimum is what is contained in the abridgment of al-Muzani (may God have mercy on him), which we arranged in *Khulasat al-Mukhtasar*; moderation is what amounts to three times that, which is the amount we presented in *al-Wasit* from the school; and exhaustive pursuit is what we presented in *al-Basit* to beyond that from the lengthy works. As for theology, its aim is protecting the beliefs transmitted by the people of the Sunnah from the righteous predecessors, nothing more. Beyond that is seeking to uncover the realities of matters not by their proper method. The aim of preserving the Sunnah is attaining the rank of the minimum in it with a sound belief, which is the amount we presented in the book *Qawa‘id al-‘Aqa’id* from the totality of this book. Moderation in it is what amounts to about one hundred pages, which we presented in the book *al-Iqtisad fi al-I‘tiq

Chapter Four  
On the Reason for People’s Turn Toward Disputation Theology, the Detailed Harms of Debate and Polemics, and the Conditions for Their Permissibility  

Know that after the Messenger of God—peace and blessings be upon him—the caliphate was undertaken by the Rightly Guided, rightly directed caliphs. They were imams, deeply knowledgeable about God Most High, jurists in His rulings, and they were independent in issuing legal verdicts concerning judgments. They rarely sought assistance from jurists except in occasional matters where consultation could not be dispensed with. Thus, the scholars devoted themselves entirely to the knowledge of the Hereafter and purified themselves for it. They would deflect requests for legal opinions and matters pertaining to worldly judgments, and they turned wholly to God Most High with the full exertion of their striving, as has been transmitted from their biographies.  

When the caliphate passed after them to individuals who assumed it without merit or independent mastery of legal verdicts and rulings, they were compelled to seek the aid of jurists and to keep them in their company in all their affairs, in order to seek their legal counsel in the course of their governance. There remained among the scholars of the Successors some who continued in the earlier manner, adhering to the purity of religion and persevering in the noble conduct of the predecessors. When summoned, they would flee and turn away. The caliphs were then forced to insistently seek them out to appoint them as judges and administrators.  

The people of those times observed the honor of the scholars and the eagerness of the imams and rulers toward them, despite the scholars’ avoidance. Thus, they stretched their necks in pursuit of knowledge as a means to attain honor and reach positions of authority with the rulers. They threw themselves into the science of legal verdicts, presented themselves to the rulers, made themselves known to them, and sought appointments and grants from them. Some were denied, while others succeeded—and even those who succeeded were not free from the humiliation of seeking and the degradation of making themselves cheap.  

Thus, the jurists, who had once been sought after, became seekers; and who had been honored by turning away from the sultans, were humbled by turning toward them—except for those whom God Most High guided in every age among the scholars of God’s religion.  

In those times, most attention was directed to the science of legal verdicts and judgments due to the great need for them in administrative and judicial posts. Later, there emerged among the leaders and commanders those who would listen to people’s discourses on the principles of creed, and whose souls inclined to hearing arguments about them. When their desire for debate and polemics in theological discourse became known, people threw themselves into the science of speculative theology, multiplied compositions in it, systematized methods of disputation, and devised various forms of refutation in doctrines. They claimed that their aim was to defend God’s religion, to struggle for the Sunnah, and to suppress innovators—just as those before them had claimed that their engagement with legal verdicts was for the sake of religion and undertaking the judgments of the Muslims out of compassion for God’s creation and sincere counsel to them.  

Then later, there appeared among the leaders those who did not approve of delving into speculative theology and opening the door of debate in it, due to the vile fanaticisms and widespread conflicts that had arisen from opening that door—leading to bloodshed and the ruin of lands. Their souls inclined instead to debate in jurisprudence and clarifying the preferred opinions within the schools of al-Shāfiʿī and Abū Ḥanīfah—may God be pleased with them—in particular. So people abandoned theology and the various sciences and poured into the disputed issues between al-Shāfiʿī and Abū Ḥanīfah especially, while showing leniency in disagreement with Mālik, Sufyān, Aḥmad—may God have mercy on them—and others. They claimed that their aim was to derive the subtleties of the Sacred Law, establish the rational bases of the school, and lay down the foundations for legal verdicts. They multiplied compositions and deductions in these, systematizing various forms of disputation and classification—and they continue upon this to this day. We do not know what God will bring about in the ages after us.  

This, then, is what motivates immersion in disputation and debates—nothing else. Had the souls of those attached to this world inclined toward disagreement with another imam among the imams, or toward another science among the sciences, they would have inclined with them and would not have refrained from justifying that what they occupied themselves with was the knowledge of religion, and that they had no aim except drawing near to the Lord of all worlds.

Clarifying the Deception in Comparing These Debates to the Consultations of the Companions and the Deliberations of the Predecessors

Know that these individuals may gradually lead people into that by claiming our aim in debates is to investigate the truth so it may become clear, for truth is sought, and cooperation in examining knowledge and the exchange of thoughts is beneficial and impactful. Such was the practice of the Companions, may God be pleased with them, in their consultations, such as their consultation on the issue of the grandfather and brothers, the punishment for drinking wine, and the liability of the Imam if he errs, as is related regarding a woman aborting her fetus out of fear of 'Umar, may God be pleased with him, and as is transmitted concerning issues of inheritance and others, and what is narrated from al-Shafi'i, Ahmad, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, Malik, Abu Yusuf, and other scholars, may God the Exalted have mercy on them. What reveals this deception to you is what I mention: that cooperation in seeking truth is part of the religion, but it has eight conditions and signs.

First: That one not engage in it while it is among the communal obligations (fard kifayah) if one has not fulfilled one's individual obligations (fard 'ayn). Whoever has an individual obligation incumbent upon him and busies himself with a communal obligation, claiming his aim is truth, is a liar. His example is one who neglects his own prayer and devotes himself to acquiring and weaving garments, saying his intention is to cover the nakedness of one who prays naked and has no garment, for that may possibly occur, just as the jurist claims the occurrence of rare cases debated in disagreements is possible. Those occupied with debate neglect matters that are, by consensus, individual obligations. If someone has a trust to return immediately and he stands to perform the prayer, which is the closest of acts of worship to God the Exalted, he disobeys by it. It does not suffice for a person to be obedient that his action is of the category of acts of obedience unless he observes its proper time, conditions, and order.

Second: That he not consider a communal obligation more important than debate. If he sees something more important and does otherwise, he disobeys by his action. His example is like one who sees a group of thirsty people on the verge of perishing, neglected by others, while he is capable of reviving them by giving them water, yet he busies himself with learning cupping, claiming it is among the communal obligations, and if the land were devoid of it people would perish. If told there are a number of cuppers in the land, sufficient in number, he says this does not remove the action from being a communal obligation. The state of one who does this and neglects attending to the pressing situation of a group of thirsty Muslims is like the state of one occupied with debate while in the land there are neglected communal obligations with no one undertaking them. As for issuing legal verdicts (fatwa), a group has undertaken it, and no land is devoid of a number of neglected obligations which the jurists pay no heed to. The closest of them is medicine, for in most lands there is no Muslim physician whose testimony can be relied upon in matters dependent on a physician's statement according to the Shari'ah, and none of the jurists desires to engage in it. Likewise, commanding good and forbidding evil is among the communal obligations. Perhaps the debater in his council of debate witnesses silk being worn or used as furnishings and remains silent, while he debates an issue that never occurs, and if it did occur, a group of jurists would handle it. Then he claims he wishes to draw near to God the Exalted through communal obligations. It has been narrated from Anas, may God be pleased with him, that it was said: "O Messenger of God, when will commanding good and forbidding evil be abandoned?" He, peace be upon him, said: "When flattery appears among your best, immorality among your worst, authority passes to your young, and jurisprudence to your vile."

Third: That the debater be a mujtahid who issues verdicts based on his own reasoning, not according to the school of al-Shafi'i, Abu Hanifah, or others, so that if the truth becomes clear to him from the school of Abu Hanifah, he abandons what agrees with the opinion of al-Shafi'i and issues a verdict based on what has become clear to him, as the Companions, may God be pleased with them, and the Imams used to do. As for one who does not have the rank of ijtihad—and this is the ruling for all people of this age—and only issues verdicts concerning what he is asked about by transmitting from the school of his Imam, then if the weakness of his school becomes clear to him, it is not permissible for him to abandon it. So what benefit does he have in debate? His school is known, and he may not issue verdicts by other than it. What is ambiguous to him obliges him to say, "Perhaps my school's founder has an answer to this, for I am not independently capable of ijtihad in the fundamentals of the Shari'ah." If his investigation were about issues in which his school has two aspects or two opinions, it would be more fitting, for he might issue a verdict with one of them and benefit from the discussion by leaning to one side. But you do not see debates conducted in such matters at all; rather, they may abandon an issue with two aspects or opinions and seek an issue where the disagreement is settled.

Fourth: That he debate only an issue that has occurred or is likely to occur frequently, for the Companions, may God be pleased with them, only consulted about what newly occurred of incidents or what was likely to occur, like matters of inheritance. We do not see debaters concerned with critiquing issues for which issuing verdicts is commonly needed; rather, they seek sensational issues that are heard of, so the field for argument expands in them however it may be. They may abandon what occurs frequently and say, "This is a textual issue," or "It is from the corners and not from the sensational matters." It is among the wonders that the objective is truth, then they abandon an issue because it is textual, and the means to truth in it is reporting, or because it is not sensational, so we do not prolong speech about it. The aim regarding truth is to shorten speech and reach the goal promptly, not to prolong.

Fifth: That debate in privacy be more beloved and important to him than in assemblies and before the presence of notables and rulers, for privacy is more conducive to comprehension, more likely for clarity of mind and thought, and grasping the truth. In the presence of a crowd, there is what stirs motives of ostentation and compels eagerness for each to vindicate himself, whether right or wrong. You know that their eagerness for assemblies and gatherings is not for God, and that one of them may be alone with his companion for a long time and not speak to him, and perhaps proposes something to him and he does not answer. But when a notable appears or a gathering convenes, he leaves no stratagem in the bow of cunning untried until he is the one specialized in speaking.

Sixth: That in seeking truth he be like one searching for a lost item, not distinguishing whether the lost item appears by his hand or by the hand of one who assists him. He sees his companion as a helper, not an opponent, and thanks him if he points out his error and shows him the truth, just as if he took a path in search of his lost item and his companion alerted him to it on another path, he would thank him, not blame him, honor him, and rejoice with him. Thus were the consultations of the Companions, may God be pleased with them, to the extent that a woman corrected 'Umar, may God be pleased with him, and alerted him to the truth while he was delivering a sermon before a gathering of people, and he said: "A woman is correct and a man is mistaken." A man asked 'Ali, may God be pleased with him, and he answered, and the man said: "It is not so, O Commander of the Faithful, but such and such." He said: "You are correct and I am mistaken, and above every possessor of knowledge is one more knowing." Ibn Mas'ud corrected Abu Musa al-Ash'ari, may God be pleased with them both, and said: "Abu Musa, do not ask me about anything while this learned one is among you." That was when Abu Musa was asked about a man who fought in the way of God and was killed, and he said: "He is in Paradise." He was the governor of Kufa, so Ibn Mas'ud stood and said: "Repeat it to the governor, perhaps he did not understand." They repeated it to him and he repeated the answer. Ibn Mas'ud said: "And I say if he was killed and hit the truth, he is in Paradise." Abu Musa said: "The truth is what he said." And thus should be the fairness in seeking truth. If something like this were mentioned now, the least of jurists would reject it and deem it improbable, saying: "It is not necessary to say 'he hit the truth,' for that is known to everyone." Look at the debaters of your time today: how one's face darkens when the truth becomes clear on the tongue of his opponent, how he is ashamed by it, how he strives to contradict it with his utmost ability, how he blames the one who silenced him for his entire life, then

Explanation of the harms of disputation and the destructive traits of character that arise from it

Know and be certain that disputation undertaken with the intent of victory, silencing opponents, displaying superiority and honor, showing off eloquence before people, aiming for ostentation and contention, and winning the admiration of people is the source of all blameworthy traits in the sight of God, yet praiseworthy in the sight of God's enemy, Iblis. Its relation to the hidden vices—such as arrogance, conceit, envy, rivalry, self-praise, love of status, and others—is like the relation of drinking wine to the outward vices—such as fornication, slander, murder, and theft. Just as one who is given the choice between drinking and other vices belittles drinking and proceeds with it, which then leads him to commit the rest of the vices in his intoxication, so too one who is overcome by the love of silencing and prevailing in disputation, and who seeks status and ostentation, is led by that to harbor all foul traits within the soul and to stir up all blameworthy characteristics. Proofs condemning these traits will come from narrations and verses in the Quarter of the Destructive Matters, but we shall now point to the main outcomes stirred by disputation.

Among them is envy. The Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Envy consumes good deeds just as fire consumes firewood." The disputant is never free from envy, for sometimes he prevails and sometimes he is defeated; sometimes his speech is praised and other times the speech of another is praised. As long as there remains in the world one who is mentioned for the strength of his knowledge and insight, or whom he deems to have better speech and stronger reasoning than himself, he will inevitably envy him and desire that blessings be removed from him and that hearts and faces turn away from him toward himself. Envy is a burning fire; whoever is afflicted by it is in torment in this world, and the torment of the Hereafter is more severe and greater. Thus, Ibn Abbas, may God be pleased with them both, said: "Take knowledge wherever you find it, and do not accept the statements of jurists against one another, for they envy each other like rams in a pen."

Among them is arrogance and looking down upon people. The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Whoever acts arrogantly, God will abase him; and whoever is humble, God will elevate him." And he, peace and blessings be upon him, narrated from God Almighty: "Grandeur is My garment and majesty is My cloak; whoever contends with Me regarding them, I will break him." The disputant is never free from arrogance toward his peers and equals, and from elevating himself beyond his worth, to the extent that they even fight over a seat among seats, competing in elevation and lowering, proximity and distance from the head cushion, and precedence in entering at narrow paths. Perhaps the foolish and the deceitful trickster among them pretends that he seeks to preserve the honor of knowledge and that the believer is prohibited from humiliating himself. Thus, they label the humility praised by God and all His prophets as humiliation, and the arrogance detested by God as the honor of religion, distorting the name and misleading creation with it, as was done with the names of wisdom, knowledge, and others.

Among them is malice. The disputant is hardly free from it. The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "The believer is not malicious." What is reported condemning malice is well-known. You will hardly see a disputant able to avoid harboring malice against one who shakes his head at his opponent's speech or hesitates in his own speech, not responding with good listening. Rather, when he witnesses that, he is compelled to harbor and nurture malice within himself. At best, he conceals it with hypocrisy, but it inevitably seeps outward in most cases. How can he be free from this when it is inconceivable that all listeners would agree to prefer his speech and approve all his states in presenting and delivering it? Indeed, if his opponent shows the slightest cause of disregard for his speech, malice is planted in his heart, not to be uprooted for the rest of his life.

Among them is backbiting, which God likened to eating carrion. The disputant persistently consumes carrion, for he never ceases recounting his opponent's speech and criticizing him. At best, he is truthful in what he reports about him and does not lie in the reporting, but he inevitably reports what indicates the deficiency of his speech, his incapacity, and the lack of his virtue—and that is backbiting.

As for lying, it is slander. Likewise, he cannot restrain his tongue from attacking the honor of one who turns away from his speech and listens to his opponent, turning to him, to the point of attributing to him ignorance, foolishness, lack of understanding, and dullness.

Among them is self-praise. God Almighty said: "So do not claim purity for yourselves; He knows best who is righteous." A sage was asked: "What is ugly truth?" He said: "A person's praise of himself." The disputant is not free from praising himself for strength, victory, and superiority over peers. During disputation, he inevitably says: "I am not one from whom such matters are hidden," and "I am the proficient in sciences, independent in principles, and preserver of hadith," and other such boasts, sometimes out of haughtiness and sometimes out of need to promote his speech. It is known that haughtiness and boasting are blameworthy by both religious law and reason.

Among them is spying and seeking out the faults of people. God Almighty said: "And do not spy." The disputant never ceases seeking the slips of his peers and probing the faults of his opponents, to the extent that if he hears of a disputant arriving in his town, he seeks someone to inform him of his hidden conditions and extracts his defects through questioning, storing them as ammunition to disgrace and shame him when needed. He even investigates his childhood conditions and bodily defects, hoping to stumble upon a mistake or a defect like a scar or other. Then, if he senses the slightest advantage over him, he alludes to it if he is restrained, considering it a subtle means, and does not refrain from disclosing it if he is brazen in folly and mockery, as narrated from some of the great disputants counted among their masters.

Among them is rejoicing at people's misfortune and grieving at their joy. Whoever does not love for his Muslim brother what he loves for himself is far from the character of the believers. Everyone who seeks ostentation by displaying virtue is inevitably pleased by what displeases his peers and equals who rival him in virtue, and mutual hatred arises between them like that between co-wives. Just as when one co-wife sees her companion from afar, her limbs tremble and her color changes, so too you see the disputant, when he sees another disputant, his color changes and his mind is disturbed, as if he beholds a rebellious devil or a fierce beast. Where then is the comfort and solace that used to flow among religious scholars upon meeting, and what is transmitted from them of brotherhood, mutual support, and sharing in ease and hardship? Al-Shafi'i, may God be pleased with him, said: "Knowledge among people of virtue and intellect is a connected mercy." I do not know how a group claims to follow his school while knowledge among them has become a cutting enmity. Can intimacy be imagined among them while seeking victory and ostentation? Far, far from it! And enough evil is that which binds you to the traits of hypocrites and absolves you from the traits of the believers and the God-conscious.

Among them is hypocrisy. There is no need to mention proofs condemning it, for they are compelled to it. They meet opponents and their lovers and supporters, finding no choice but to show affection to them with the tongue, displaying longing and esteem for their status and conditions. Both the speaker and the addressed, and everyone who hears from them, know that this is falsehood, forgery, hypocrisy, and immorality. They show affection with tongues while their hearts harbor hatred—we seek refuge in God Almighty from it. The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "When people learn knowledge and abandon practice, show mutual love with tongues while their hearts harbor hatred, and sever kinship ties, God will curse them at that time, making them deaf and blinding their sight." This is confirmed by observing this condition.

Among them is arrogance toward the truth and aversion to it, and eagerness for contention therein, to the extent that the most hateful thing to a disputant is for the truth to appear on his opponent's tongue. From these two, his exertion to deny and reject it with utmost effort becomes apparent, employing the extreme of his capability in deception, cunning, and trickery to repel it, until contention therein becomes a natural habit. He hears no speech except that a drive to object to it arises from his nature, until this overcomes his heart even regarding the proofs of the Quran and the expressions of the Sacred Law, pitting some against others. Contention in opposing falsehood is cautioned against, for the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, encouraged abandoning contention even with truth against falsehood. He said: "Whoever abandons contention while he is in the wrong, God will build for him a house in the outskirts of Paradise; and whoever abandons contention while he is in the right, God will build for him a house in the highest part of Paradise." God Almighty



Chapter Five

On the Etiquette of the Student and the Teacher

As for the student, his outward etiquettes and duties are many, but their scattered parts are organized into ten principles:

The First Duty: To prioritize the purification of the soul from base character traits and blameworthy attributes. For knowledge is the worship of the heart, the prayer of the inner self, and the means for the inward being to draw near to God, Exalted is He. Just as the prayer, which is the duty of the outward limbs, is not valid except by purifying the outward from impurities and filth, so too is the worship of the inward and the cultivation of the heart with knowledge not valid except after its purification from the foulness of character traits and the filth of attributes. The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Religion is built upon cleanliness." And it is so both inwardly and outwardly. God, Exalted is He, says: "Indeed, the polytheists are impure" (Qur'an 9:28), alerting minds that purity and impurity are not restricted to outward, tangible matters. For a polytheist may have clean clothes and a washed body, but his essence—that is, his inward—is stained with foulness. 'Impurity' is an expression for that which is to be avoided and from which distance is sought. The foul attributes of the inward are more important to avoid, for they are, in addition to their present foulness, destructive in the ultimate end. Therefore, the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Angels do not enter a house in which there is a dog." The heart is a house; it is the dwelling of the angels, the place where their influence descends, and the locus of their settlement. Blameworthy attributes such as anger, lust, rancor, envy, arrogance, conceit, and their like are barking dogs. How then can angels enter it when it is filled with dogs? And God, Exalted is He, does not cast the light of knowledge into the heart except through the mediation of angels. "And it is not for any human being that God should speak to him except by revelation or from behind a partition or that He sends a messenger to reveal, by His permission, what He wills" (Qur'an 42:51). Likewise, what is sent from the mercy of knowledge to hearts is only managed by the angels entrusted with it. They are the sanctified, purified ones, free from blameworthy attributes. They do not attend to anything but what is good, nor do they bestow what they possess from the treasuries of God's mercy except upon that which is good and pure. I do not say that the intended meaning of the word 'house' is the heart and of 'dog' is anger and blameworthy attributes. Rather, I say it is an allusion to it. There is a difference between interpreting outward things as referring to inward realities and alluding to inward realities by mentioning outward things while affirming the outward realities themselves. The esotericists (al-Bāṭiniyyah) differ in this subtle point, for this is the path of taking lessons, which is the way of the scholars and the righteous. The meaning of taking a lesson is to transfer what is mentioned to something else, not to restrict oneself to it. Just as a rational person sees a calamity befall another and takes it as a lesson for himself—transferring from it to being alert that he too is susceptible to calamities and that the world is prone to reversal. His transferring from another to himself and from himself to the root nature of the world is a praiseworthy lesson. So you too, transfer from the house, which is a structure of creation, to the heart, which is a house from the building of God, Exalted is He. And from the dog, which is blamed for its attribute, not its form—meaning what it contains of predatory nature and impurity—to the canine spirit, which is that predatory nature.

Know that the heart filled with anger, greed for the world, predatory covetousness for it, and eagerness to tear apart people's honor is, in meaning, a dog, though in form a heart. The light of insight perceives meanings, not forms. In this world, forms dominate over meanings, and meanings are hidden within them. In the Hereafter, forms will follow meanings, and meanings will dominate. Therefore, every person will be resurrected according to his meaningful form. "Thus, the one who tears apart people's honor will be resurrected as a ravenous dog; the greedy for their wealth as a predatory wolf; the arrogant over them in the form of a leopard; and the seeker of leadership in the form of a lion." Reports have come to this effect, and consideration attests to it for those of insight and vision.

If you say: "How many a student of vile character has acquired sciences!" Far be it—he is far from the true, beneficial knowledge that brings happiness in the Hereafter. For among the first fruits of that knowledge is that it becomes clear to him that sins are deadly, destructive poisons. Have you ever seen someone knowingly ingest a poison while aware it is a deadly poison? What you hear from those merely bearing the form is talk they concoct with their tongues at one time and repeat with their hearts at another. That is not from knowledge in any way. Ibn Mas'ūd, may God be pleased with him, said: "Knowledge is not abundant narration. Indeed, knowledge is a light cast into the heart." Some said: "Knowledge is only reverence," due to His saying, Exalted is He: "Only those fear God among His servants who have knowledge" (Qur'an 35:28). It is as if he pointed to the most specific fruit of knowledge. Therefore, some of the verifiers said regarding the meaning of their statement, "We learned knowledge for other than God, but knowledge refused to be for other than God": "Knowledge refused and was withheld from us, so its reality was not unveiled to us. We only obtained its narration and its words."

If you say: "I see a group of scholars and verifiers among the jurists who excelled in subsidiary and fundamental matters and were counted among the masters, yet their character was blameworthy—they did not purify themselves from it." It is said: When you know the ranks of sciences and know the knowledge of the Hereafter, it becomes clear to you that what they occupied themselves with is of little benefit insofar as it is knowledge. Its benefit is only insofar as it is an act for God, Exalted is He, if intended as a means to draw near to Him. An allusion to this has preceded, and further clarification and elucidation will come to you in it, God willing.

The Second Duty: That he reduces his attachments to worldly occupations and distances himself from family and homeland. For attachments are distracting and diverting. "God has not made for any man two hearts within his breast" (Qur'an 33:4). Whenever thought is divided, it falls short of grasping realities. Therefore, it is said: "Knowledge will not give you some of itself until you give it your all. If you give it your all, you are in danger from its giving you but a portion." Thought divided over scattered matters is like a stream whose water is dispersed: the earth absorbs some of it, and the air snatches some of it, so nothing remains of it that gathers and reaches the sown field.

The Third Duty: That he is not arrogant towards knowledge nor domineering over his teacher. Rather, he should surrender the reins of his affair to him completely in every detail and submit to his advice like the ignorant, sick patient submits to the compassionate, skilled physician. He should be humble towards his teacher and seek reward and honor through his service. Al-Sha'bī said: Zayd ibn Thābit prayed over a funeral, and his mule was brought close for him to ride. Ibn 'Abbās came and took hold of his stirrup. Zayd said: "Zayd, leave it, O cousin of the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him!" Ibn 'Abbās said: "Thus we have been commanded to treat the scholars and the elders." So Zayd ibn Thābit kissed his hand and said: "Thus we have been commanded to treat the household of our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Flattery is not from the character of the believer, except in seeking knowledge." It is not fitting for a student of knowledge to be arrogant towards the teacher. Part of his arrogance towards the teacher is to disdain benefiting except from the prominent and famous. This is the height of foolishness. For knowledge is the cause of salvation and happiness. He who seeks escape from a predatory beast about to devour him does not distinguish between whether a famous or an obscure person guides him to flee. The ferocity of the beasts of the Fire due to ignorance of God, Exalted is He, is more severe than the ferocity of any beast. Wisdom is the lost property of the believer; he seizes it wherever he finds it and acknowledges the favor of whoever conveys it to him, whoever it may be. Therefore, it is said: "Knowledge is hostile to the arrogant youth, just as the flood is hostile to the high place." Knowledge is only attained through humility and attentive listening. God, Exalted is He, says: "Indeed in that is a reminder for whoever has a heart or who listens while he is present [in mind]" (Qur'an 50:

The Tenth Duty: To understand the hierarchy of sciences relative to the ultimate aim, so that one may prioritize the lofty and proximate over the distant, and the essential over the non-essential. The meaning of 'essential' is that which concerns you, and nothing concerns you except your affair in this world and the Hereafter. If you cannot combine the pleasures of this world with the bliss of the Hereafter—as the Qur'an has declared and as the light of spiritual insight, which operates like direct vision, testifies—then the most essential is that which endures for all eternity. At that point, the world becomes a waystation, the body a mount, and one's deeds a journey toward the objective. There is no objective except meeting God Almighty, for in that lies all bliss, though in this world none know its true measure save the very few.

The sciences, in relation to the happiness of meeting God, glorified and exalted is He, and gazing upon His Noble Countenance—I mean the gazing sought and understood by the Prophets, distinct from what occurs to the understanding of the common folk and the theologians—are of three levels. Understand this through the analogy of a balance: It is like a servant whose manumission and empowerment with kingship is made contingent upon performing the Hajj. He is told: "If you perform the Hajj and complete it, you will attain both freedom and kingship. But if you begin the journey of Hajj and its preparations, and an unavoidable obstacle prevents you on the way, you will attain only manumission and deliverance from the misery of servitude, not the happiness of kingship."

He thus has three categories of occupation: The first is preparing the means: purchasing the she-camel, stitching the water-skin, and preparing provisions and a mount. The second is the journey itself: leaving his homeland and heading toward the Ka'bah, station after station. The third is occupying himself with the rites of Hajj, pillar after pillar. Then, after completion, relinquishing the state of *ihram*, and performing the Farewell Tawaf, he becomes deserving of being presented with kingship and sovereignty. In each of these stations, from the very beginning of preparing the means to its end, from the first step of traversing the deserts to its end, and from the first pillar of Hajj to its end, there are degrees. The proximity of one who has begun the pillars of Hajj to happiness is not like the proximity of one who is still preparing provisions and a mount, nor like the proximity of one who has just begun the journey; rather, he is closer than them.

Similarly, the sciences are also of three divisions: A division that corresponds to preparing provisions and a mount and purchasing the she-camel. This is the science of medicine and jurisprudence, and what pertains to the worldly interests of the body. A division that corresponds to traversing the deserts and overcoming obstacles. This is purifying the inner self from the turbidity of blameworthy traits and surmounting those towering obstacles which the earlier and later generations have been incapable of overcoming, save those granted success. This is traversing the path, and acquiring its knowledge is like acquiring knowledge of the directions of the path and its stations. And just as knowledge of the stations and routes of the deserts is of no avail without traversing them, so too is knowledge of refining character of no avail without directly undertaking that refinement. However, direct undertaking without knowledge is impossible. A third division corresponds to the Hajj itself and its pillars. This is knowledge of God Almighty, His attributes, His angels, His actions, and all that we have mentioned in the chapters on Unveiling (*Mukashafa*). Herein lies salvation and triumph with happiness.

Salvation is attained by every traveler on the path if his aim is the true objective, which is safety. As for triumph with happiness, it is attained only by those who know God Almighty (*al-'arifun*), who are those brought near, bestowed with favor in the proximity of God Almighty, with spirit, sweet basil, and the Garden of Bliss. As for those prevented from the pinnacle of perfection, they have salvation and safety, as God, Mighty and Majestic, said: "So if he is of those brought near, then [for him is] rest and bounty and a garden of pleasure. And if he is of the companions of the right, then [the angels will say], 'Peace for you from the companions of the right.'" And whoever does not turn toward the objective and does not rise for it, or rises toward its direction not with the intent of compliance and servitude but for a transient purpose, he is of the companions of the left and of those astray; for him is a drink of scalding water and the burning of Hellfire.

Know that this is the true certainty (*Haqq al-Yaqin*) for the firmly rooted scholars—I mean they have grasped it through an inward witnessing that is stronger and clearer than the witnessing of eyesight. They have ascended in it beyond the limit of mere imitation based on hearing. Their state is like that of one who was informed and believed, then witnessed and verified. The state of others is like that of one who accepted with good attestation and faith but did not attain witnessing and direct vision. Happiness lies beyond the knowledge of Unveiling (*'Ilm al-Mukashafa*), and the knowledge of Unveiling lies beyond the knowledge of Transaction (*'Ilm al-Mu'amala*), which is traversing the path of the Hereafter and overcoming the obstacles of [blameworthy] traits. And traversing the path of eradicating blameworthy traits lies beyond the knowledge of [those] traits. And the knowledge of the path of treatment and how to traverse it lies beyond the knowledge of the body's soundness and the means that assist health. And the body's soundness through social organization, mutual support, and cooperation—by which one attains clothing, food, and shelter—is tied to the ruler and his law in restraining people upon the method of justice and governance, which is in the domain of the jurist. As for the means of health, they are in the domain of the physician.

Whoever said, "Knowledge is of two kinds: knowledge of bodies and knowledge of religions," and by the latter meant jurisprudence, intended thereby the apparent, widespread sciences, not the precious, inward sciences.

If you ask: "Why did you liken the science of medicine and jurisprudence to preparing provisions and a mount?" Then know that the one who strives toward God Almighty to attain His proximity is the heart, not the body. I do not mean by 'heart' the tangible flesh, but rather it is one of the secrets of God, Mighty and Majestic, which perception cannot grasp; a subtle essence from His subtleties. Sometimes it is referred to as the spirit (*ruh*), sometimes as the contented soul (*an-nafs al-mutma'innah*). The Sacred Law refers to it as the heart (*qalb*) because it is the primary mount for that secret, and through it the entire body becomes a mount and instrument for that subtle essence. Unveiling the veil from that secret is from the knowledge of Unveiling (*'Ilm al-Mukashafa*), and it is something guarded, indeed there is no permission to speak of it. The utmost that is permitted concerning it is to say: It is a precious substance, a valuable pearl, more noble than these visible corporeal bodies. It is rather a divine command (*amr ilahi*), as He, exalted is He, said: "And they ask you about the spirit. Say, 'The spirit is of the command of my Lord.'" All creatures are ascribed to God Almighty, but its ascription is nobler than the ascription of the other bodily members, for to God belongs creation and command altogether, and the command is higher than creation. This precious substance, which carries the trust of God Almighty and is advanced with this rank above the heavens, the earths, and the mountains—for they refused to carry it and feared it—is from the world of command. Do not understand from this any allusion to its pre-eternity, for one who claims the pre-eternity of spirits is deluded, ignorant, and knows not what he says. Let us restrain the reins of exposition in this art, for it is beyond our present purpose.

The intended point is that this subtle essence is the one who strives for proximity to the Lord, because it is from the command of the Lord; from Him is its origin and to Him is its return. As for the body, it is its mount which it rides and by means of which it strives. The body, for it, on the path to God Almighty, is like the she-camel for the body on the path of Hajj, and like the water-skin that stores the water which the body needs. Therefore, any science whose purpose is the welfare of the body is from the totality of the interests of the mount. It is not hidden that medicine is like this, for one may need it to preserve the health of the body. Even if a person were alone, he would need it. Jurisprudence differs in that if a person were alone, he might perhaps dispense with it. But he is created in a manner that he cannot live alone, for he cannot independently strive to procure his food through plowing, planting, baking, and cooking, nor to procure clothing and shelter, nor to prepare all the tools for that. Thus, he is compelled to socialize and seek assistance. Whenever people mix and their desires are stirred, they contend for the means of desires, dispute, and

The Seventh Duty: That the limited learner should be presented with the clear knowledge suitable for him, and nothing beyond this involving precise subtleties should be mentioned to him, for it is withheld from him. For that would weaken his desire for the clear knowledge, confuse his heart, and suggest to him miserliness in withholding it from him, since everyone thinks himself worthy of every subtle science. There is no one except that he is content with God—glorified and exalted be He—regarding the perfection of his intellect, and the most foolish among them and the weakest in intellect is the most pleased with the perfection of his own intellect. From this it is known that whoever from the common people is bound by the constraint of the Sacred Law, and the doctrines transmitted from the predecessors—without likening God to creation and without interpretation—are firmly established in his soul, and his inner state is good, and his intellect cannot bear more than that, then his belief should not be confused. Rather, he should be left to his craft. For if interpretations of the apparent meanings were mentioned to him, the constraint of the common people would be loosened from him, and he would not be easily constrained by the constraint of delving [into such matters]. Thus, the barrier between him and sins would be lifted, and he would turn into a rebellious devil, destroying himself and others. Indeed, one should not delve with the common people into the realities of the subtle sciences. Rather, one should restrict oneself with them to teaching the acts of worship and teaching trustworthiness in the crafts they are engaged in, and fill their hearts with longing and fear for Paradise and Hellfire as the Qur’an has spoken, and not stir up doubts for them. For perhaps a doubt may cling to his heart and he finds it difficult to resolve, so he becomes wretched and perishes. In sum, the door of investigation should not be opened for the common people, for it would distract them from their crafts upon which the order of creation and the sustenance of the elite depends.

The Eighth Duty: That the teacher should be one who acts upon his knowledge, so that his action does not contradict his speech. For knowledge is perceived by insights, and action is perceived by sights, and the possessors of sights are more numerous. So when action contradicts knowledge, guidance is prevented. Whoever partakes of something and tells people, "Do not partake of it," then it is a deadly poison; people mock him and accuse him, and their eagerness for what they are forbidden increases, so they say, "Were it not the most pleasant and delightful of things, he would not keep it for himself." The likeness of the guiding teacher from the seekers of guidance is like the impression from clay and the shadow from the stick. How can clay be imprinted by what has no impression? And when can the shadow be straight if the stick is crooked? Therefore, it is said in meaning:
"Do not forbid a character trait and then come with its like;
A great disgrace upon you if you do."
And God the Exalted said: "Do you enjoin righteousness upon people while you forget yourselves?" (Al-Baqarah 2:44). Therefore, the burden of the scholar in his sins is greater than the burden of the ignorant, for many stumble by his stumbling and follow him. "And whoever initiates a bad practice will bear its burden and the burden of whoever acts by it." Therefore, 'Ali—may God be pleased with him—said: "Two men have broken my back: a scholar who is wanton and an ignorant one who is devout." The ignorant one deceives people by his devotion, and the scholar deceives them by his wantonness. And God knows best.

Chapter Six: On the Defects of Knowledge and the Distinguishing Marks of the Scholars of the Hereafter and the Evil Scholars

We have mentioned what has been narrated concerning the virtues of knowledge and scholars. Severe warnings have also come concerning evil scholars, indicating that they will be the most severely punished of creation on the Day of Resurrection. Among the most important matters is to know the distinguishing marks between the scholars of this world and the scholars of the Hereafter. By scholars of this world, we mean the evil scholars whose aim in seeking knowledge is to enjoy worldly life and to attain status and position among its people.

The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Indeed, the most severely punished person on the Day of Resurrection will be a scholar from whom Allah derived no benefit through his knowledge." And from him, peace and blessings be upon him: "A person is not a scholar until he acts according to his knowledge." And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Knowledge is of two types: knowledge on the tongue—that is Allah's proof against His creation—and knowledge in the heart—that is the beneficial knowledge." And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "There will come at the end of time ignorant worshippers and immoral scholars." And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Do not seek knowledge to boast before scholars, nor to argue with the foolish, nor to turn people's faces towards you, for whoever does that is in the Fire." And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Whoever withholds knowledge he possesses, Allah will bridle him with a bridle of fire." And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "I fear for you more than the Dajjal something other than the Dajjal." It was said, "What is that?" He said, "Misguiding leaders." And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Whoever increases in knowledge but does not increase in guidance increases nothing from Allah except distance." And Jesus, peace be upon him, said: "For how long will you describe the path to the night travelers while you yourselves remain with the bewildered?"

This and other narrations indicate the immense gravity of knowledge, for the scholar either exposes himself to eternal perdition or to eternal felicity. By delving into knowledge, he has forfeited safety if he does not attain felicity.

As for the reports from the predecessors: 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said: "What I fear most for this nation is the hypocritical learned one." They said, "How can he be a learned hypocrite?" He said, "Learned of tongue, ignorant of heart and action." Al-Hasan, may Allah have mercy on him, said: "Do not be among those who gather the knowledge of scholars and the subtleties of the wise, yet proceed in action like the foolish." A man said to Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him: "I wish to seek knowledge, but I fear I will waste it." He said: "Abandoning knowledge is sufficient waste of it." It was said to Ibrahim ibn 'Uyaynah: "Which people have the longest regret?" He said: "As for in the immediate life of this world, it is the one who does good to an ungrateful person. As for at the time of death, it is a negligent scholar." Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad said: "Men are four: A man who knows and knows that he knows—he is a scholar, so follow him. A man who knows but does not know that he knows—he is asleep, so awaken him. A man who does not know but knows that he does not know—he is a seeker of guidance, so guide him. A man who does not know and does not know that he does not know—he is an ignorant one, so reject him." Sufyan al-Thawri, may Allah have mercy on him, said: "Knowledge calls out to action; if it responds, it stays; otherwise, it departs."

Ibn al-Mubarak said: "A person remains a scholar as long as he seeks knowledge. When he thinks he has attained knowledge, he has become ignorant." Al-Fudayl ibn 'Iyad, may Allah have mercy on him, said: "I pity three: a mighty man whose people are humbled, a rich man who becomes poor, and a scholar with whom the world plays." Al-Hasan said: "The punishment of scholars is the death of the heart, and the death of the heart is seeking the world through the deeds of the Hereafter." And they recited:

I wonder at one who buys misguidance with guidance,
And more wondrous is he who buys his world with his religion.
And more wondrous than these two is he who sells his religion
For the world of another; he is the most wondrous of them.

And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Indeed, the scholar is punished with a punishment that makes the people of the Fire circle around him, awed by its severity." He meant the immoral scholar. And Usamah ibn Zayd said: I heard the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, say: "The scholar will be brought on the Day of Resurrection and thrown into the Fire. His intestines will spill out, and he will circle with them as a donkey circles a millstone. The people of the Fire will circle around him and say, 'What is wrong with you?' He will say, 'I used to enjoin good and not do it, and I used to forbid evil and do it.'"

The punishment of the scholar for his disobedience is multiplied because he disobeyed with knowledge. Therefore, Allah the Exalted said: "Indeed, the hypocrites will be in the lowest depth of the Fire." Because they denied after knowledge. And He made the Jews worse than the Christians, even though they did not ascribe a son to Allah, Glorified is He, nor said He is the third of three, but because they denied after recognition, as Allah said: "They recognize him as they recognize their sons." And He said: "But when there came to them that which they recognized, they disbelieved in it. So the curse of Allah be upon the disbelievers." And He said in the story of Balaam son of Beor: "And relate to them the story of him to whom We gave Our signs, but he detached himself from them; so Satan pursued him, and he became of the deviators." Until He said: "So his example is like that of the dog: if you chase him, he pants, or if you leave him, he pants." Likewise is the immoral scholar, for Balaam was given the Book of Allah but clung to desires, so he was likened to a dog—meaning, whether he was given wisdom or not, he pants after desires.

And Jesus, peace be upon him, said: "The example of evil scholars is like a rock that fell at the mouth of a river: it neither drinks the water nor lets the water reach the crops. And the example of evil scholars is like a sewage channel: its exterior is plaster and its interior is filth. And like graves: their exterior is adorned and their interior is the bones of the dead."

These narrations and reports clarify that the scholar who is among the children of this world is in a baser state and more severe punishment than the ignorant, and that the successful, those brought near, are the scholars of the Hereafter. They have distinguishing marks:

Among them is that he does not seek the world through his knowledge. For the lowest degree of a scholar is that he realizes the insignificance, baseness, impurity, and transience of this world, and the greatness, permanence, purity of bliss, and majesty of the dominion of the Hereafter. And he knows that the two are opposed, like co-wives: whenever you please one, you anger the other. And they are like the two pans of a scale: whenever one becomes heavy, the other becomes light. And they are like the east and the west: the closer you get to one, the farther you are from the other. And they are like two cups: one is full and the other empty. To the extent you pour from one into the other until it fills, the other empties. For whoever does not recognize the insignificance and impurity of the world, the mixing of its pleasures with pain, and then the passing of what is pure from it, is corrupt in intellect, for observation and experience guide to that. So how can one be among the scholars who has no intellect? And whoever does not know the greatness of the matter of the Hereafter and its permanence is a disbeliever, stripped of faith. So how can one be among the scholars who has no faith? And whoever does not know the opposition of the world to the Hereafter, and that combining them is a hope for the impossible, is ignorant of the laws of all the prophets; rather, he is a disbeliever in the entire Qur'an from beginning to end. So how can he be counted among the ranks of scholars? And whoever knows all this yet does not prefer the Hereafter over the world is a captive of Satan; his desire has destroyed him and his wretchedness has overcome him. So how can one whose state is this be counted among the party of scholars?

In the narrations from David, peace be upon him, is a report from Allah the Exalted: "The least I do to a scholar

When Hatim entered Baghdad, the people of Baghdad gathered around him and said, "O Abu 'Abd al-Rahman, you are a man of knowledge, but you are a non-Arab, and no one speaks to you except that you refute them." He said, "I possess three traits with which I prevail over my opponent: I rejoice when my opponent is correct, I grieve when he errs, and I guard myself from being ignorant toward him." This reached Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who said, "Glory be to God! How intelligent are his people! Let us go to him." When they entered upon him, he said to him, "O Abu 'Abd al-Rahman, what is safety from this world?" He replied, "O Abu 'Abd Allah, you will not be safe from the world until you possess four traits: you forgive people for their ignorance, you protect them from your ignorance, you give them of your possessions, and you despair of acquiring anything from theirs. If you are like this, you will be safe."

Then he traveled to Medina, and the people of Medina came out to meet him. He said, "O people, what city is this?" They said, "The city of the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him." He said, "Then where is the palace of the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, so that I may pray in it?" They said, "He did not have a palace; he only had a humble house close to the ground." He said, "Then where are the palaces of his Companions, may God be pleased with them?" They said, "They did not have palaces; they only had humble houses close to the ground." Hatim said, "O people, then this is the city of Pharaoh!" They seized him and took him to the ruler and said, "This non-Arab says this is the city of Pharaoh." The governor said, "Why is that?" Hatim said, "Do not hasten against me. I am a non-Arab stranger who entered the city and said, 'What city is this?' They said, 'The city of the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him.' I said, 'Then where is his palace?'" and he related the story. Then he said, "And God Almighty has said: 'There has certainly been for you in the Messenger of God an excellent example' (Al-Ahzab: 21). So whom have you taken as your example? The Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, or Pharaoh, the first to build with plaster and baked bricks?" They released him and left him. This is the account of Hatim al-Asamm, may God have mercy on him. There will come, in the sections on the conduct of the pious predecessors regarding simplicity and avoiding adornment, what testifies to this in its proper places.

The truth of the matter is that adorning oneself with what is permissible is not forbidden, but indulging in it leads to familiarity with it, to the point that abandoning it becomes difficult. Maintaining adornment is usually only possible by engaging in means that necessitate committing sins, such as hypocrisy, concern for people, seeking their approval, and other matters that are prohibited. Prudence lies in avoiding that, for whoever indulges in the world will not be safe from it at all. If safety were attainable while indulging in it, the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, would not have gone to such lengths in abandoning worldly things, to the point of removing the embroidered shirt and removing the gold ring during the sermon, among other things that will be explained later.

It is related that Yahya ibn Yazid al-Nawfali wrote to Malik ibn Anas, may God be pleased with them both:
"In the name of God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, and may God bless His Messenger Muhammad among the first and the last. From Yahya ibn Yazid ibn 'Abd al-Malik to Malik ibn Anas: To proceed, it has reached me that you wear fine garments, eat delicate bread, sit on cushions, and place a doorkeeper at your door. You have taken the seat of knowledge, and mounts have been spurred toward you, and people have traveled to you and taken you as an imam, and they are pleased with your statements. So fear God Almighty, O Malik, and adhere to humility. I have written this advice to you in a letter that none has seen except God, glory and majesty be to Him. And peace."

Malik wrote to him:
"In the name of God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, and may God bless our master Muhammad and his family and companions and grant them peace. From Malik ibn Anas to Yahya ibn Yazid, may the peace of God be upon you. To proceed, your letter has reached me and has found a place of advice, compassion, and courtesy with me. May God grant you enjoyment through piety and reward you well for your advice. I ask God Almighty for success, and there is no power nor strength except with God, the Most High, the Most Great. As for what you mentioned to me—that I eat delicate bread, wear fine garments, seclude myself, and sit on cushions—we do that and seek forgiveness from God Almighty. Indeed, God Almighty has said: 'Say, "Who has forbidden the adornment of God which He has produced for His servants and the good [lawful] things of provision?"' And I know that abandoning that is better than entering into it. Do not cease writing to us, for we will not cease writing to you. And peace."

Observe the fairness of Malik, for he acknowledged that abandoning that is better than entering into it, and he gave a legal opinion that it is permissible. He was truthful in both. And the likes of Malik, in his position, when his soul permits fairness and acknowledgment in such advice, his soul also gains the strength to observe the limits of the permissible so that it does not lead him to ostentation, hypocrisy, and transgression into the disliked. As for others, they are incapable of this. Therefore, turning to enjoy the permissible is a great danger and far from fear and awe. The distinctive quality of the scholars of God is awe, and the distinctive quality of awe is distancing oneself from the places of danger.

Among them is that he should be completely averse to rulers and not enter upon them at all as long as he finds a way to flee from them. Rather, he should be cautious about mixing with them even if they come to him, for the world is sweet and green, and its reins are in the hands of rulers. One who mixes with them cannot avoid striving to please them and win their hearts, even though they are oppressors. It is incumbent upon every religious person to denounce them and distress them by exposing their oppression and condemning their actions. Thus, one who enters upon them either pays attention to their adornment and thereby belittles the favor of God upon him, or remains silent about denouncing them and thus becomes a hypocrite toward them, or strives in his speech to please them and improve their condition, and that is clear falsehood, or hopes to attain something of their worldly possessions, and that is unlawful gain. In the Book of the Lawful and the Unlawful, what may be taken from the wealth of rulers and what may not, such as stipends and gifts, will be discussed. In summary, mixing with them is a key to evils, and the scholars of the Hereafter take precaution as their way.

The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Whoever takes to the desert becomes harsh; whoever follows hunting becomes heedless; and whoever frequents rulers is tested." And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "There will be rulers over you whom you will recognize and disapprove of. Whoever disapproves is absolved, and whoever dislikes is safe, but whoever approves and follows, God Almighty will distance him." It was said, "Shall we not fight them?" He said, "No, as long as they pray."

Sufyan said: "In Hell there is a valley inhabited only by scholars who visit kings." Hudhayfah said: "Beware of the positions of trials." It was said, "What are they?" He said: "The gates of rulers. One of you enters upon a ruler and affirms him with falsehood and says about him what is not in him."

The Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "The scholars are the trustees of the messengers over the servants of God Almighty as long as they do not mix with rulers. If they do that, they have betrayed the messengers, so beware of them and avoid them."

It was said to al-A'mash: "You have revived knowledge due to the many who take it from you." He said: "Do not hasten. A third will die before attaining it, a third will frequent the gates of rulers—they are the worst of creation—and the remaining third, only a few will succeed." Therefore, Sa'id ibn al-Musayyab, may God have mercy on him, said: "If you see a scholar frequenting rulers, beware of him, for he is a thief." Al-Awza'i said: "There is nothing more hateful to God Almighty than a scholar who visits a ruler." The Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "The worst scholars are those who come to rulers, and the best rulers are those who come to scholars."

In describing these scholars, Ali, may God be pleased with him, said in a long tradition: "Hearts are vessels, and the best of them are those most receptive to good. People are of three kinds: a godly scholar, a learner on the path of salvation, and a rabble, common followers of every caller, swaying with every wind, who have not been illuminated by the light of knowledge nor taken refuge in a firm stronghold. Knowledge is better than wealth. Knowledge guards you, while you guard wealth. Knowledge increases through spending, while wealth is diminished by spending. Knowledge is a religion by which one is judged; through it one gains obedience in his lifetime and a goodly reputation after his death. Knowledge is a ruler, and wealth is ruled over. The benefit of wealth vanishes with its disappearance. The keepers of wealth have died, though they are alive, while the scholars are alive, enduring as long as time endures." Then he sighed deeply and said, "Alas! Here is abundant knowledge, if only I could find bearers for it. Rather, I find a seeker who is not trustworthy, who uses the tool of religion to seek the world, who boasts with God's favors upon His allies and uses His argument against His creation; or one who submits to the people of truth, but doubt is sown in his heart at the first occurrence of a doubt—he has no insight, neither this nor that; or one obsessed with pleasures, compliant in the pursuit of desires; or one driven to amass wealth and hoard, submissive to his whim, most resembling grazing cattle. O God, thus knowledge dies when its bearers die." Then he said, "Yet the earth will not be devoid of one who stands for God with a proof, either manifest and unconcealed, or fearful and subdued, so that the proofs and clear signs of God, the Exalted, are not nullified. How many are they, and where are they? They are the fewest in number, the greatest in rank. Their persons are lost, but their likenesses are present in hearts. God, the Exalted, preserves His proofs through them until they entrust them to those after them and plant them in the hearts of their like. Knowledge has led them to the reality of the matter, so they have experienced the spirit of certainty. They have found ease in what the indulgent find difficult, and they have found familiarity in what the heedless find desolate. They have accompanied the world with bodies whose spirits are attached to the Highest Abode. Those are the allies of God, Mighty and Majestic, from His creation, His trustees, and His agents in His earth, and the callers to His religion." Then he wept and said, "Oh, my longing to see them!" This last that he mentioned is the description of the scholars of the Hereafter, which is knowledge most of which is gained through action and persistence in spiritual struggle.

Among them is that he be intensely concerned with strengthening certainty, for certainty is the capital of religion. The Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Certainty is all of faith." Thus, it is necessary to learn the knowledge of certainty—I mean its foundations—then the path is opened for the heart. For this reason, he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Learn certainty." Its meaning is: keep company with the certain, listen from them the knowledge of certainty, and persist in following them so that your certainty may strengthen as their certainty strengthened. A little certainty is better than much action.

And he, peace and blessings be upon him, said when it was said to him: "A man of good certainty but many sins, and a man striving in worship but little certainty." He, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "There is no son of Adam except that he has sins." But whoever has intellect as his innate disposition and certainty as his natural character, sins do not harm him, for whenever he sins, he repents, seeks forgiveness, and regrets, so his sins are expiated, and a surplus remains for him by which he enters Paradise. For this reason, he, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "From the least of what you have been given is certainty and the resolve of patience. Whoever is given his share of these two, he does not care what he misses of night prayer and daytime fasting."

And in the advice of Luqman to his son: "O my son, action is not achievable except with certainty, and a person only acts according to the measure of his certainty. No worker falls short until his certainty diminishes." And Yahya ibn Mu'adh said: "Monotheism has a light, and polytheism has a fire. The light of monotheism burns away the sins of the monotheists more than the fire of polytheism burns the good deeds of the polytheists." He meant by this certainty. And God, the Exalted, has alluded in the Qur'an to the mention of the certain in places indicating that certainty is the bond for good deeds and felicities.

If you say: "What is the meaning of certainty, and what is the meaning of its strength and weakness? It must be understood first, then one can busy oneself with seeking and learning it, for what one does not understand the form of cannot be sought."

Know that certainty is a shared term used by two groups for two different meanings. As for the speculative theologians and dialecticians, they express by it the absence of doubt, for the soul's inclination to affirm something has four stations:

The first: that affirmation and denial are balanced, expressed as doubt. As if you were asked about a specific person—whether God, the Exalted, will punish him or not—and his state is unknown to you, your soul does not incline to judge him with affirmation or negation; rather, the possibility of both matters is equal to you. This is called doubt.

The second: that your soul inclines to one of the two matters while feeling the possibility of its opposite, but it is a possibility that does not prevent giving preference to the first. As if you were asked about a man you know for his righteousness and piety—if he died in this state, would he be punished? Your soul inclines more to him not being punished than to him being punished, due to the appearance of signs of righteousness. Yet, you allow for the concealment of a cause warranting punishment in his inwardness and secret. This allowance is equal to that inclination, but it does not negate its preponderance. This state is called conjecture.

The third: that the soul inclines to affirming something such that it dominates it, and nothing else occurs to the mind. If something else did occur to the mind, the soul would refuse to accept it. But this is not with definitive knowledge, for if the possessor of this station were to contemplate well and listen to doubt and allowance, his soul would expand for allowance. This is called a belief close to certainty, and it is the belief of the common people in all religious matters, for it has become firmly rooted in their souls merely by hearing, such that every faction is confident in the soundness of its school and the correctness of its imam and followed one. If the possibility of his imam's error were mentioned to one of them, he would shrink from accepting it.

The fourth: true knowledge attained through a proof in which there is no doubt and doubt cannot be conceived. When the existence and possibility of doubt are precluded, it is called certainty according to these people. An example is that if it is said to a rational person: "Is there in existence something that is eternal?" He cannot affirm it by immediate intuition, because the eternal is not sensed, unlike the sun and moon, for one affirms their existence by sense. Knowledge of the existence of an eternal, pre-existent thing is not necessary like knowledge that two is more than one, and like knowledge that the occurrence of an event without a cause is impossible, for this is also necessary. It is proper for the innate intellect to hesitate in affirming the existence of the eternal based on spontaneity and immediate intuition. Then among people are those who hear that and affirm it by hearing with decisiveness and persist in it. That is belief, and it is the state of all common people. And among people are those who affirm it by proof, which is to say to him: "If there is no eternal in existence, then all existents are originated. If they are all originated, then they are originated without a cause, or among them is an originated thing without a cause, and that is impossible. What leads to the impossible is impossible, so the mind is compelled to affirm the existence of something eternal by necessity." Because the divisions are three: that all existents are eternal, or all are originated, or some are eternal and some are originated. If all are eternal, then the objective is achieved, for an eternal is established in general. If all are originated, that is impossible, for it leads to origination without a cause. Thus, the third or first division is established. Any knowledge attained in this manner is called certainty according to these people, whether attained by reflection like what we mentioned, or by sense, or by innate intellect like knowledge of the impossibility of an event without a cause, or by mass transmission like knowledge of the existence of Mecca, or by experience like knowledge that cooked scammony is a purgative, or by evidence as we mentioned.

Their condition for applying this name is the absence of doubt. Every knowledge in which there is no doubt is called certainty according to these people. On this basis, certainty is not described as weak, for

The Seventh Chapter

On the Intellect, Its Nobility, Its True Nature, and Its Categories



An Exposition on the Nobility of the Intellect

Know that this matter requires no forced effort to demonstrate, especially since the nobility of knowledge has already been made evident. Reason is the source, the spring, and the foundation of knowledge, and knowledge flows from it as fruit from a tree, light from the sun, and sight from the eye. How then could that which is the means to happiness in this world and the next not be noble? Or how could there be doubt concerning it, when even a beast, despite its limited discernment, holds reason in awe? Indeed, the largest of beasts in body, the fiercest in savagery, and the strongest in power, when it sees the form of a human, is awed and fears it, sensing its mastery over it due to the human's unique endowment of perceiving stratagems. For this reason, the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "An elder among his people is like a prophet among his nation." This is not due to his abundant wealth, nor his imposing stature, nor his superior strength, but due to the increase of his experience, which is the fruit of his reason. Thus, you see Turks, Kurds, the rough Bedouins among the Arabs, and other people, despite their proximity to the rank of beasts, naturally revere the elders. Similarly, when many of the obstinate opponents intended to kill the Messenger of God (peace be upon him), and their eyes fell upon him and were anointed by his noble countenance, they feared him, and there appeared to them what gleamed upon the silk of his face from the light of prophethood, even though that was inwardly hidden within the depths of reason. Thus, the nobility of reason is perceived necessarily. Our intent here is only to relate what has come in the reports and verses concerning the mention of its nobility.

God has named it light in His saying (Exalted is He): "God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The example of His light is like a niche..." And He named the knowledge derived from it spirit, revelation, and life. He said (Exalted is He): "And thus We have revealed to you a spirit from Our command." And He said (Glorified is He): "Or one who was dead, and We gave him life and made for him a light by which he walks among the people?" And wherever light and darkness are mentioned, He intends by them knowledge and ignorance, such as His saying: "He brings them out from darkness into the light."

And the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "O people, comprehend from your Lord, and counsel one another with reason, so that you may recognize what you have been commanded and what you have been forbidden. Know that it will aid you before your Lord. Know that the rational one is he who obeys God, even if he is ugly in appearance, insignificant in status, lowly in rank, and shabby in attire; and the ignorant one is he who disobeys God Almighty, even if he is beautiful in appearance, great in status, noble in rank, handsome in attire, eloquent and fluent in speech. For monkeys and swine are more rational in the sight of God Almighty than one who disobeys Him. And do not be deceived by the worldly people's exaltation of them, for they are among the losers."

And the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "The first thing God created was the Intellect. He said to it: 'Come forward,' and it came forward. Then He said: 'Turn back,' and it turned back. Then God (Mighty and Majestic) said: 'By My might and majesty, I have not created a creature more honorable to Me than you. Through you I take, through you I give, through you I reward, and through you I punish.'"

If you say: "This intellect, if it is an accident, how was it created before bodies? And if it is a substance, how can it be a self-subsisting substance that is not localized?" Then know that this pertains to the knowledge of unveiling, and it is not fitting to mention it within the science of practical conduct, and our aim now is to mention the sciences of practical conduct.

From Anas (may God be pleased with him), who said: "Some people praised a man in the presence of the Prophet (peace be upon him) until they exaggerated. He (peace be upon him) said: 'How is the man's intellect?' They said: 'We inform you of his striving in worship and various good deeds, and you ask us about his intellect?' He (peace be upon him) said: 'The fool, through his ignorance, attains more than the transgression of the transgressor. Indeed, the worshippers will be elevated tomorrow in the highest degrees near their Lord according to the measure of their intellects.'"

From 'Umar (may God be pleased with him), who said: The Messenger of God (peace be upon him) said: "No man has gained anything like the virtue of an intellect that guides its possessor to guidance and turns him away from ruin. Nor is a servant's faith perfected, nor his religion made upright, until his intellect is perfected."

And the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "Indeed, a man may attain by his good character the rank of the fasting, praying person. But a man's good character is not perfected until his intellect is perfected. At that point, his faith is perfected, he obeys his Lord, and disobeys his enemy, Iblis."

From Abu Sa'id al-Khudri (may God be pleased with him), who said: The Messenger of God (peace be upon him) said: "Everything has a pillar, and the pillar of the believer is his intellect. According to the measure of his intellect is his worship. Have you not heard the saying of the wicked in the Fire: 'If only we had listened or reasoned, we would not be among the companions of the Blaze' (Qur'an 67:10)?"

From 'Umar (may God be pleased with him) that he said to Tamim al-Dari: "What is nobility among you?" He said: "Intellect." He said: "You have spoken truthfully. I asked the Messenger of God (peace be upon him) as I asked you, and he said as you said." Then he said: "I asked Gabriel (peace be upon him): 'What is nobility?' He said: 'Intellect.'"

From al-Bara' ibn 'Azib (may God be pleased with him), who said: "Questions became numerous one day for the Messenger of God (peace be upon him), so he said: 'O people, everything has a mount, and the mount of a person is his intellect. The best of you in guidance and knowledge of the proof is the most excellent of you in intellect.'"

From Abu Hurayrah (may God be pleased with him), who said: When the Messenger of God (peace be upon him) returned from the Battle of Uhud, he heard people saying, "So-and-so is braver than so-and-so," and "So-and-so endured what so-and-so did not endure," and the like. The Messenger of God (peace be upon him) said: "As for this, you have no knowledge of it." They said: "How is that, O Messenger of God?" He (peace be upon him) said: "They fought according to what God apportioned to them of intellect, and their victory and their intention were according to the measure of their intellects. Those among them who were struck down were struck down at various stations. When the Day of Resurrection comes, they will be allotted stations according to the measure of their intentions and the measure of their intellects."

From al-Bara' ibn 'Azib that he (peace be upon him) said: "The angels strove and exerted themselves in obeying God (Glory and Exaltation be to Him) with intellect, and the believers among the children of Adam strove according to the measure of their intellects. Thus, the most diligent in obeying God (Mighty and Majestic) is the one most abundant in intellect."

From 'A'ishah (may God be pleased with her), who said: I said: "O Messenger of God, by what do people excel in this world?" He said: "By intellect." I said: "And in the Hereafter?" He said: "By intellect." I said: "Are they not recompensed according to their deeds?" He (peace be upon him) said: "O 'A'ishah, did they perform deeds except according to the measure of intellect that God (Mighty and Majestic) gave them? According to the measure they were given of intellect were their deeds, and according to the measure of their deeds they are recompensed."

From Ibn 'Abbas (may God be pleased with them both), who said: The Messenger of God (peace be upon him) said: "Everything has a tool and an instrument, and the tool of the believer is intellect. Everything has a mount, and the mount of a person is intellect. Everything has a pillar, and the pillar of religion is intellect. Every people have an aim, and the aim of the worshippers is intellect. Every people have a caller, and the caller of the worshippers is intellect. Every merchant has merchandise, and the merchandise of the strivers is intellect. Every household has a guardian, and the guardian of the houses of the truthful is intellect. Every ruin has a builder, and the builder of the Hereafter is intellect.

Explanation of the Reality of Intellect and Its Divisions

Know that people have differed regarding the definition and reality of intellect, with the majority overlooking that this name is applied to different meanings, which became the cause of their disagreement. The truth that unveils the cover in this matter is that the term "intellect" is applied by way of commonality to four meanings, just as the name "eye," for example, is applied to several meanings and what follows this pattern. Thus, it is not appropriate to seek a single definition for all its categories; rather, each category should be individually elucidated.

The first is the attribute by which a human being is distinguished from other animals, and it is that by which one is prepared to receive theoretical sciences and manage subtle intellectual crafts. This is what al-Harith ibn Asad al-Muhasibi intended when he said in defining intellect that it is an innate disposition by which one is prepared to perceive theoretical sciences, as if it were a light cast into the heart, by which one becomes ready to perceive things. He who denies this and reduces intellect to mere necessary sciences is not just, for the heedless of sciences and the sleeper are both called possessors of intellect by virtue of the presence of this innate disposition in them, despite the absence of sciences. Just as life is an innate disposition by which the body is prepared for voluntary movements and sensory perceptions, so too intellect is an innate disposition by which some animals are prepared for theoretical sciences. If it were permissible to equate a human and a donkey in innate disposition and sensory perceptions, saying there is no difference between them except that God Almighty, by the decree of customary practice, creates sciences in humans and does not create them in donkeys and animals, then it would be permissible to equate a donkey and an inanimate object in life, saying there is no difference except that God Almighty creates specific movements in the donkey by the decree of customary practice. For if the donkey were imagined as a dead inanimate object, one would have to say that every movement observed from it, God, glorified and exalted, is capable of creating in it according to the observed order. And just as it is necessary to say that its distinction from inanimate objects in movements is only due to an innate disposition specific to it, expressed as life, likewise the distinction of a human from an animal in perceiving theoretical sciences is due to an innate disposition expressed as intellect. It is like a mirror that differs from other bodies in depicting images and colors due to a quality specific to it, which is polish. Similarly, the eye differs from the forehead in qualities and forms by which it is prepared for sight. Relating this innate disposition to sciences is like relating the eye to sight, and relating the Quran and the Divine Law to this innate disposition in its connection to the unveiling of sciences for it is like relating the light of the sun to vision. Thus should this innate disposition be understood.

The second is the sciences that come into existence in the essence of the discerning child, such as the knowledge of the permissibility of permissible things and the impossibility of impossible things, like knowing that two is more than one, and that a single person cannot be in two places at one time. This is what some theologians meant when they said in defining intellect that it is some of the necessary sciences, like knowledge of the permissibility of permissible things and the impossibility of impossible things. This is also correct in itself, for these sciences exist, and naming them intellect is evident. The corruption lies only in denying that innate disposition and saying there is nothing existent except these sciences.

The third is sciences acquired from experiences through the courses of circumstances. For one whom experiences have matured and paths have refined is said to be possessor of intellect in customary terms, and one not characterized by this quality is said to be dull, crude, ignorant. This is another type of science called intellect.

The fourth is that the power of that innate disposition reaches the point where one knows the consequences of matters, suppresses the appetite calling to immediate pleasure, and overcomes it. When this power is attained, its possessor is called possessor of intellect in that his advance and restraint are according to what consideration of consequences necessitates, not by the decree of immediate appetite. This too is among the specific characteristics of humans by which they are distinguished from other animals.

The first is the foundation, the root, the source. The second is the nearest branch to it. The third is a branch of the first and second, for by the power of the innate disposition and necessary sciences, the sciences of experiences are acquired. The fourth is the ultimate fruit, the highest goal. The first two are by nature, the last two by acquisition. Therefore, Ali, may God honor his countenance, said: "I saw intellect as two: innate and heard. And the heard does not benefit if it is not innate, just as the sun does not benefit when the light of the eye is prevented."

The first is intended by his saying, peace be upon him: "God Almighty has not created a creation more honorable to Him than intellect." The last is intended by his saying, peace be upon him: "When people draw near by the gates of righteousness and good works, you draw near by your intellect." And it is intended by the saying of the Messenger of God, peace be upon him, to Abu al-Darda, may God be pleased with him: "Increase in intellect, and you will increase in nearness to your Lord." He said: "May my father and mother be sacrificed for you, and how is that for me?" He said: "Avoid the prohibitions of God Almighty and fulfill the obligations of God, glorified be He, and you will be possessor of intellect. And act with righteous works, and you will increase in elevation and honor in the immediate world, and attain in the ultimate hereafter thereby nearness and might from your Lord Almighty."

And from Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib: Umar, Ubayy ibn Ka'b, and Abu Hurayra, may God be pleased with them, entered upon the Messenger of God, peace be upon him, and said: "O Messenger of God, who is the most knowledgeable of people?" He said, peace be upon him: "The possessor of intellect." They said: "And who is the most devout of people?" He said: "The possessor of intellect." They said: "And who is the best of people?" He said: "The possessor of intellect." They said: "Is it not that the possessor of intellect is one whose manliness is complete, whose eloquence is apparent, whose hand is generous, and whose station is great?" He said, peace be upon him: "And all that is but enjoyment of the life of this world, and the hereafter with your Lord is for the God-fearing. Verily, the possessor of intellect is the God-fearing, even if he is lowly and humble in this world."

He said, peace be upon him, in another narration: "The possessor of intellect is only he who believes in God, affirms His messengers, and acts in obedience to Him."

It seems that the origin of the name in the root of the language is for that innate disposition, and likewise in usage. It is applied to sciences only in that they are its fruit, just as a thing is known by its fruit, so it is said knowledge is fear, and the knower is he who fears God Almighty, for fear is the fruit of knowledge. Thus it becomes like a metaphorical application for other than that innate disposition. But the aim is not investigation into language; the intended meaning is that these four categories exist, and the name is applied to all of them. There is no disagreement in the existence of all except in the first category, and the correct view is their existence; indeed, it is the foundation. These sciences are as if embedded in that innate disposition by nature, but appear in existence when a cause occurs that brings them out into existence, so much so that these sciences are not something coming to it from outside, but as if they were latent within it and then appeared. Its example is water in the earth, for it appears by digging the well and gathers and becomes distinct to the senses, not by something new being conveyed to it. Likewise, oil in the almond and rosewater in the rose. Therefore, God Almighty said: "And when your Lord took from the children of Adam, from their loins, their descendants and made them testify over themselves, 'Am I not your Lord?' They said, 'Yes.'" The meaning of this is the affirmation of their souls, not the affirmation of tongues, for they divided in the affirmation of tongues where tongues and persons are found into affirmers and deniers. Therefore, God Almighty said: "And if you ask them who created them, they will surely say, 'God.'" Meaning, if you consider their states, their souls and innermost beings testify to that—the nature of God upon which He created people—meaning every human is created upon faith in God Almighty, indeed upon knowledge of things as they are, meaning they are as if embedded in it due to the proximity of its readiness for perception. Then, since faith is embedded in souls by nature, people divided into two groups: those who turned away and forgot—they are the disbelievers—and those who pondered and remembered, like one who carried a testimony then forgot it in heedlessness, then remembered it. Therefore, God Almighty said: "That they might remember," "And that those of understanding may remember," "And remember the favor of God upon you and His covenant with which He bound you," "And We have certainly made the Quran easy for remembrance, so is there any who will remember?" Naming this pattern "remembrance

[1] The hadith, "Whomever Allah intends good for, He grants him understanding in religion and inspires him with guidance," is agreed upon (Bukhari: 71 and Muslim: 1073-175) from the narration of Mu'awiyah, without the phrase "and inspires him with guidance." This addition is found in al-Tabarani's al-Kabir.

[2] The hadith, "The scholars are the heirs of the prophets," was reported by Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah, and Ibn Hibban in his Sahih from the narration of Abu al-Darda'.

[3] The hadith, "All that is in the heavens and the earth seeks forgiveness for the scholar," is part of the preceding hadith of Abu al-Darda'.

[4] The hadith, "Wisdom increases the noble in nobility..." was reported by Abu Nu'aym in al-Hilyah, Ibn 'Abd al-Barr in Bayan al-'Ilm, and 'Abd al-Ghani al-Azdi in Adab al-Muhaddith from the narration of Anas with a weak chain.

[5] The hadith, "Two traits do not combine in a hypocrite..." was reported by al-Tirmidhi from the narration of Abu Hurayrah, and he said it is a *gharib* hadith.

[6] The hadith, "The best of people is the believing scholar..." was reported by al-Bayhaqi in Shu'ab al-Iman as a *mawquf* statement attributed to Abu al-Darda' with a weak chain, and I have not seen it as a *marfu'* narration.

[7] The hadith, "Faith is naked..." was reported by al-Hakim in Tarikh Naysabur from the narration of Abu al-Darda' with a weak chain.

[8] The hadith, "The closest of people to the rank of prophethood are the people of knowledge and jihad..." was reported by Abu Nu'aym in Fadl al-'Alim al-'Afif from the narration of Ibn 'Abbas with a weak chain.

[9] The hadith, "The death of a tribe is easier than the death of a scholar," was reported by al-Tabarani and Ibn 'Abd al-Barr from the narration of Abu al-Darda', and the origin of the hadith is with Abu al-Darda'.

[10] The hadith, "People are like mines..." is agreed upon from the narration of Abu Hurayrah.

[11] The hadith, "On the Day of Resurrection, the ink of the scholars and the blood of the martyrs will be weighed," was reported by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr from the narration of Abu al-Darda' with a weak chain.

[12] The hadith, "Whoever preserves for my community forty hadiths from the Sunnah until he conveys them to them, I will be an intercessor and a witness for him on the Day of Resurrection," was reported by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr in al-'Ilm from the narration of Ibn 'Umar, and he deemed it weak.

[13] The hadith, "Whoever carries for my community forty hadiths will meet Allah on the Day of Resurrection as a jurist, a scholar," was reported by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr from the narration of Anas, and he deemed it weak.

[14] The hadith, "Whoever seeks deep understanding in the religion of Allah, Allah will suffice him his concerns..." was reported by al-Khatib in al-Tarikh from the narration of 'Abdullah ibn Ju'ayr al-Zubaydi with a weak chain.

[15] The hadith, "Allah revealed to Abraham, 'O Abraham, I am All-Knowing, and I love every knowledgeable one,'" was mentioned by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr as a *mu'allaq* narration, and I have not found a chain for it.

[16] The hadith, "The scholar is the trustee of Allah on earth," was reported by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr from the narration of Mu'adh with a weak chain.

[17] The hadith, "Two types of people from my community: if they are righteous, the people become righteous..." was reported by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr and Abu Nu'aym from the narration of Ibn 'Abbas with a weak chain.

[18] The hadith, "If a day comes upon me in which I do not increase in knowledge that brings me closer..." was reported by al-Tabarani in al-Awsat, Abu Nu'aym in al-Hilyah, and Ibn 'Abd al-Barr in al-'Ilm from the narration of 'A'ishah with a weak chain.

[19] The hadith, "The superiority of the scholar over the worshiper is like my superiority over the lowest man among my companions," was reported by al-Tirmidhi from the narration of Abu Umamah, and he said it is *hasan sahih*.

[20] The hadith, "The superiority of the scholar over the worshiper is like the superiority of the moon on the night of the full moon over all other stars," was reported by Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhi, al-Nasa'i, and Ibn Hibban, and it is a segment of the preceding hadith of Abu al-Darda'.

[21] The hadith, "On the Day of Resurrection, the prophets will intercede, then the scholars, then the martyrs," was reported by Ibn Majah from the narration of 'Uthman ibn 'Affan with a weak chain.

[22] The hadith, "Allah has not been worshiped with anything better than deep understanding in religion..." was reported by al-Tabarani in al-Awsat, Abu Bakr al-Ajurri in Kitab Fadl al-'Ilm, and Abu Nu'aym in Riyadat al-Muta'allimin from the narration of Abu Hurayrah with a weak chain. It is also found in al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah from the narration of Ibn 'Abbas with a weak chain ("A jurist is harder on Satan than a thousand worshippers").

[23] The hadith, "The best of your religion is its easiest, and the best worship is deep understanding," was reported by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr from the narration of Anas with a weak chain. The first part is found in Ahmad from the narration of Muhjan ibn al-Adra' with a good chain, and the second part is found in al-Tabarani from the narration of Ibn 'Umar with a weak chain.

[24] The hadith, "The superiority of the believing scholar over the believing worshiper is by seventy degrees..." was reported by Ibn 'Adi from the narration of Abu Hurayrah with a weak chain. Abu Ya'la has something similar from the narration of 'Abd al-Barr ibn 'Awf.

[25] The hadith, "You have entered a time with many jurists..." was reported by al-Tabarani from the narration of Hazam ibn Hakim from his uncle, and it is also said from his father, and its chain is weak.

[26] The hadith, "Between the scholar and the worshiper is a hundred degrees..." was reported by al-Isfahani in al-Targhib wa al-Tarhib from the narration of Ibn 'Umar from his father, and he said: "Seventy degrees," with a weak chain. Similarly, the author of Musnad al-Firdaws reported it from the narration of Abu Hurayrah.

[27] The hadith, "It was said, 'O Messenger of Allah, which deeds are best?' He said, 'Knowledge of Allah...'" was reported by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr from the narration of Anas with a weak chain.

[28] The hadith, "Allah will resurrect the servants on the Day of Resurrection, then He will resurrect the scholars..." was reported by al-Tabarani from the narration of Abu Musa with a weak chain.

[29] *Al-sifad*: Sexual intercourse.

[30] I have not found it in the nine books (as verified in one edition of the *Ihya'*), and al-Hafiz al-'Iraqi did not mention it.

[31] In some editions: *waqifan* (standing).

[32] It may be a noble Prophetic hadith; see the book *Dhikr al-Mawt wa ma Ba'dahu*, which is the last book of the *Ihya'*, and the book *al-Munqidh min al-Dalal* by the author, may Allah have mercy on him.

[33] The hadith, "Whoever treads a path seeking knowledge..." was reported by Muslim (2699/38) from the narration of Abu Hurayrah.

[34] The hadith, "Indeed, the angels lower their wings for the seeker of knowledge, pleased with what he does," was reported by Ahmad (4/240, 239), Ibn Hibban, and al-Hakim who authenticated it, from the narration of Safwan ibn 'Assal.

[35] The hadith, "To go forth in the morning and learn a chapter of goodness is better for you than to pray a hundred rak'ahs," was reported by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr from

